Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "Letters from Hell"
See other formats
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 



VOL. L 



?b 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 



M. BOWEL. }al*uL+»*}** *; 



N '<ul«Uvi/wa/v Jrfa&'/iii lyJu$<- <L- 



Itf T!TO VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 




LONDON: 

RICHARD BENTLEY, 8, NEW BURLINGTON STREET; 1 

AND COPENHAGEN. 

1866. 






-V** 



■'"'■ ' / 



• • • • • 

• • • • • 

• • • •• • 



' s. 



PREFACE, 

Which should not he overlooked. 



For ages there has been a widely extended 
belief in the existence of letters or messages 
from Heaven, Were they collected together, 
they would form by no means a diminutive 
code. Letters from Hell deserve equal credit ; 
aye, even greater ! For what can the saints 
in light have to write to us about? It is a 
different matter with the others. The rich 
man in the Gospel evidently felt an inward 
longing to communicate with those he had 
left in the world behind him. 

Let everybody form his own opinion and 
judgment on the matter. I have only the 
simple duty to perform of attesting to the 
authenticity of these Letters. Should any one 



VI POSTSCRIPT. 

entertain any doubt thereof, it will be the 
worse for him. 

How these letters came into my possession 
is another question altogether. Rightly con- 
sidered, it is an inquisitive question that does 
not deserve any answer. It is not for their 
sakes who attach excessive importance to it 
that I have had these letters printed. 



POSTSCRIPT. 

And yet, to be perfectly candid, I must con- 
fess that it took me a long, a very long, time 
before I could determine on giving these Let- 
ters to the public. 

The assurance that they might prove the 
salvation of many, and the perdition of a few, 
did not satisfy me. The case of these latter 
lay heavily on my mind. I am alluding now 
to the weak heads and the faint hearts. 

To the first, alas ! I have no counsel to 
give ; but to the latter, God be praised, I 
know of one which "may be safely depended 



POSTSCRIPT. , Vll 

upon! It is the compassionate love of the 
Good Shepherd, in whose bosom perfect 
peace and safety may be found. Truly, not 
one soul shall be lost that only cries from 
the heart, " Lord save me ; I perish !" 

In firm reliance on this love of Jesus I now 
send forth the following Letters to the world. 
That they will cause restlessness and pain to 
many gives me no concern. On the con- 
trary, it is just my very hope that many 
hearts may be touched, and be brought to 
inquire in fear and trembling : 
"Ah! what shall we do?" 
The answer is given, and is plain : 

" Repent, and believe the Gospel." 



Nov. 3, 1866. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER I. 

I felt myself to be dying. After a long 
period of unconsciousness, during which I had 
raved wildly under the influence of delirium, 
my senses returned once more. I was so 
weak that I could move neither hand nor 
foot ; while my eyelids, unable even to sustain 
their own weight, fell down again as soon as 
raised, and my tongue clung to the roof of 
my mouth. 

They were standing round my bedside, and 
I could hear them whispering to one another, 
" Poor fellow, he does not suffer much !" 

But I did suffer : more, far more, than mor- 
tal man can imagine ! For I plainly felt that 
I must die. The bare thought of dying had 
ever been a source of terror to me ; but the 

VOL. I. B 



2 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

dreadful reality of its meaning now burst on 
me in this hour for the first time. I say in 
this hour ! And yet I lay in this state several 
days, though indeed they were but one endless 
hour of agony. 

Where was my faith the while ? Once I 
had had one ; but that was long, long ago ! In 
vain I tried to recall it, or at least some little 
portion of it. I had nothing to cling to in 
my fearful distress. I would have clutched 
at a straw, but my convulsive, groping hand 
found nothing to lay hold of — nothing ! 

Oh, the import of that terrible expression ! 
I know of only one, which is more terrible — 
" Too late!" 

But there was something which I did not 
grasp at, did not seek after, that forced itself 
upon me with a marvellous clearness and ful- 
ness. It was the life I had led, and which in 
a few moments more would be closed. The 
good I had ever done was but little ; the evil, 
oh how great ! It stood out before my eyes 
like a picture. I had lived only for myself, 
and my own pleasure. Oh, terrible truth ! 
I had been travelling along the broad road of 
death, not life's narrow path, from the very 
first. And now I was lying there, the victim 
of my own folly, utterly miserable ; without 
hope of salvation. My sins stood arrayed 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 3 

before me, dyed in blood ; but it was too late 
to repent. At that hour, indeed, I had no 
longer any conception of the meaning of the 
word repentance. I was the prey of despair. 

Not yet fifty years old; in possession of 
ample means, and to die so soon ! It seemed 
an impossibility ; and yet I knew that death 
was inevitable. It was stealing fast upon me. 
I felt it in the dusky twilight of my sick 
room ; I saw it in the faces of those who stood 
by my bedside ; I heard it in the deep silence 
that prevailed. It was a fearful scene ! And 
I, the chief actor in it, lay there ; all eyes bent 
on me ; all ears listening eagerly to catch my 
last gasp. The death chill was already cur- 
dling my blood ; it was as if I lay entombed 
alive. 

One, one only source of comfort remained. 
" It will not be worse for you than for many 
others." Nothing, perhaps, that I could say, 
is better adapted to depict the utter wretched- 
ness of my state, than this miserable ground 
of consolation. 

But why dwell upon my last struggle ? No 
living soul can realize what my sufferings 
were. I had Hell within me — nay, Hell was 
still looming before me ! At length, I once 
more opened my eyes, and saw reflected on 
the faces of the bystanders the terror that was 



4 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

visible on my own : one long, deep-drawn 
sigh, one convulsive shudder, and I was no 
more! 

It was an indescribable feeling that I now 
experienced. Death was still quivering 
through my frame, but I felt myself released, 
freed, lightened. My consciousness, which for 
one moment had been extinguished, dawned 
once more the next. Where was I ? Thick 
clouds and mists, a desolate void, hemmed me 
in on all sides. It was not, however, literally 
dark ; for I could see, though no ray of light 
fell on my eyeballs. The first sensation I 
remember to have experienced was an icy 
chill ; it pierced me through and through, till 
I shuddered again, and my teeth chattered in 
my head. The second was a feeling of sick- 
ness, not of that description which one calls 

in the world heart-sickness Where was 

I? . . . Involuntarily, the history of the rich 
man, who awoke to find himself in the place 
of torment, flashed through my mind. . . . 
Could I be that rich man ? . . . But of him 
it is said that he pined for one drop of cold 
water ! He must have been parched up, then, 
with heat, while I literally froze from cold, so 
that I gnashed my teeth. . . . Yes, there is 
an allusion to that, too, in another place ; it 
must be true then ; and the other, the devour- 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 5 

ing flame, was true also — terribly true. I 
was soon to realize it ! 

Self-consciousness having returned, I per- 
ceived that I was naked. Perhaps that was 
why I felt so terribly cold. At first I thought 
I was the same — unchanged ; but I was only 
the shadow of what I had been. The eye 
which saw, the teeth which gnashed, were not 
really existent, neither was any other part of 
my body. I was a shadow ; stripped bare to 
the very core of my heart. No wonder, then, 
that I froze; no wonder that I felt myself 
naked; and yet with all this no feeling of 
shame came over me. But" I did feel myself 
to be endlessly wretched. All that manliness 
in my nature of which I had formerly been so 
proud, was gone. In the world they call a 
human being of the most abject description, a 
beggar. Alas ! I was much, much lower. 
While my funeral doubtless was being cele- 
brated with due pomp and magnificence in 
the world above, I was making my entrance 
into Hell ; naked, incomparably miserable. 
While the clergyman, maybe in unctuous 
words, was touching on my memory, and 
averring that I a was now beyond the reach of 
pain and suffering, . . .- that Heaven was 
opened to me ; " while, in a word, he was ex- 
pending all the eulogiums on me which are 



6 LETTERS FROM HELL. . 

customary on such occasions, I was sitting in 
the midst of Hell's torments. 

I went on. Was it the ground that I 
was standing on? It seemed like a swamp 
beneath my feet. A wondrous pavement! 
perhaps it was the good intentions with which 
Hell is said to be paved. 

I went on : on through the fogs and dark- 
ness. Far, far off, perhaps it was a thousand 
miles, I espied a light. I instinctively turned 
my steps toward it. The fog seemed to lift 
little by little. Perhaps it was unreal, a 
mirage ; like those phantom castles and houses 
which emerged here and there out of the hazy 
atmosphere. Sometimes it appeared as if I 
went through one of these airy buildings in 
my blind haste. I saw ghost-like shapes, 
too ; first singly, now in troops. I trembled 
with fear, though I knew well enough that 
they were neither more nor less than beings 
like myself. All at once I found myself sur- 
rounded by a troop of them. I fled away in 
my terror, but only to fall into the hands of 
another band. I say hands, for they tore and 
pulled at me, though I did not feel their 
touch, as they sought in vain to hold me fast. 
Meantime they kept chattering and gibbering 
at each other. But, oh ! what voices ! it sounded 
in my ears like the faint, smothered creaking 



/ 

/a 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 7 

A a rusty wheel. In my fright, I, too, uttered 
^a cry, and heard the same abominable, doleful 
/ sound. I could not understand what they 
/ were saying, and yet I fancied I could distin- 
guish the words, oft-times repeated, " Whence ? 
. . . what news?" Oh! wretched man that I 
was, . . . what news could I tell ? " Whence " 
was not the idea that engrossed my thoughts, 
but « Whither ! " 

Happily there were other poor wretches on 
the same road, and under similar circum- 
stances to mine ; so whilst the roaming bands 
were chasing them, I managed to escape. 
Breathless I dashed along (breathless, I mean, 
in soul, not in body), till I found a lonely spot, 
where I could rest awhile and collect my scat- 
tered thoughts. Alas, alas ! what was there 
for me to collect, what to counsel about ? Was 
I not lost for ever ? 

Overwhelmed with grief I sank down, and 
began to meditate on my wretched condition. 

" So . . . I was in the kingdom of death . . . 
in Hell ... in torments. Oh, that it should 
have come to this ! Why *had I halted be- 
tween faith and disbelief? — between Heaven 
and Hell, till the last moment? ... A few 
months, aye, a few days back, it would not, 
perhaps, have been too late to turn, and thus 
have avoided such a fearful fate. Bj e# 



r 



8 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

rushed into it blindly. ... I had deserved 
it." 

And I felt a certain bitter satisfaction at 
this last thought: for I detested myself with 
a burning, implacable hatred, even in the very 
midst of my self-love, which had been my 
second nature, and which I had brought with 
me undiminished in intensity. I could have 
torn myself into a thousand pieces, when I 
reflected on the many so-called good inten- 
tions which I had never carried out in the 
days of my life of sin. . . . Had I, then, 
helped to pave Hell with them ? 

And there was no sorrow, no remorse min- 
gled with it. I was grieved, crushed ; I cursed 
myself; but I could. feel no sorrow. Oh, if I 
could only do so ! ... I know so well what 
it is ; but the power is gone for ever. And 
yet with all this hatred of myself, I felt the 
sincerest sympathy for myself . . . Oh, to have 
been able to shed only one tear ! The rich 
man in the Grospel sighed after one drop of 
water. ... I sighed. . . . Oh ! . . . only for one 
single tear! I had an inward feeling that 
if I could only weep, I should experience some 
relief. I writhed in agony; I wasted my 
strength in convulsive endeavours to try and 
weep one tear. Just then a voice addressed 
in vavsisA I started up. It was a young woman, 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 9 

who was standing before me, holding an 
infant in her arms. 

" ! leave off ... it is all in vain !" she 
said softly and earnestly. And yet the ex- 
pression of tenderness was more in her looks 
than in her voice. " I have tried myself so 
often, but all to no purpose. Here no drop 
of water is ever found ... no ! not even a 
tear-drop !" 

I felt too plainly that she spoke the truth. 
Once I could have wept, but would not ; now 
I wished to weep, but was unable. She sat 
down by my side, with her baby on her breast. 

Indescribable was the expression of gentle- 
ness, mingled with pain, with which she re- 
garded it. It seemed to be newly born, one 
that had barely seen the light of day. 

After a short pause, she turned towards 
me ; but it was no longer with me that she 
was engrossed, but with her child. 

" It is not true," she said ; " the child lives. 
It is not dead ! no ! it is not dead ! — though 
it does lie so still, with its eyes closed!" 

I certainly thought it was dead ; but as I 
did not wish to add to the poor creature's 
grief, replied, " Yes ! I think it is asleep ; 
little children generally sleep so much." 

"Yes! . . . yes! ... it sleeps;" and she 
began to rock it to and fro on her knee. 



10 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

"They said I had murdered it," she re- 
sumed. . . . "My own child ... Oh! was 
it not a mad story ? — A mother to kill her 
own babe I" And she pressed it to her 
bosom with convulsive energy. 

I could endure it no longer, so hurried 
away. And yet I experienced a certain 
degree of relief in occupying myself with 
another's grief than my own. But from the 
one I could fly away ; from the .other, flight 
was impossible. 

Still on, ever in the direction of the distant 
light, as if some magic power attracted me. 
Well peopled was the land of darkness. 
Wondrous phantom shapes of endless variety, 
shadows of persons, shadows of things. There 
was much to terrify, much to cause pain ; and 
yet gradually* I began even to feel myself 
at home in this accursed state of negative 
existence. 

Gradually I began to gather experience ; 
but I will pass this part of my history by in 
silence. I will only narrate one circumstance, 
because it was the first opportunity that pre- 
sented itself of enabling me to learn tvhat the 
actual conditions of the place were. 

I was standing outside one of those trans- 
parent phantom buildings I have alluded to. 
It was intended to represent a tavern. In the 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 11 

world above such low places had been far be- 
neath my notice ; now everything was on the 
same level. Apparently, mirth and merriment 
prevailed inside, accompanied with drinking, 
card-playing, and dice. It was a hideous 
mirth those phantom shapes indulged in. One 
of them, the landlord, I presume, presently 
beckoned to me to enter. Allured by the fire 
that blazed cheerily on the hearth, I foolishly 
obeyed his signal. 

"Cannot the man see the door?" he mut- 
tered, in a peevish tone. 

Taken aback at his remark, I merely replied 
that I was freezing with cold. 

" Blockhead ! then why go about naked ?" 
he exclaimed, with a demoniac grin. " Only 
well-dressed persons enter here !" 

I know not how it was, but my thoughts 
immediately reverted to my old warm dressing- 
gown, and in an instant I had it on me. And 
yet it did not cover my nakedness, nor did I 
feel any warmer than before. I therefore ap- 
proached closer to the fire ; but it did not give 
out the smallest vestige of warmth, the flame 
might as well have been a painted represen- 
tation. 

Heartsick, I was beginning to turn away, 
when one of the guests called to me in a 
laughing tone, while another handed me a 



12 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

flagon. A drinker I had never been; my 
tastes had been in another direction. But 
now I eagerly seized it, and placed it to my 
lips to quaff it down. Oh ! that sensation of 
emptiness! that indescribable insipidity! A 
feeling of faintness came over me, as I sought 
to quench my burning thirst in gulping 
draughts of — pure nothingness. It must have 
been plainly depicted on my face, for they 
laughed and grinned at me, and said humor- 
ous things at my expense. I learnt to bear it. 
But there was something dreadful in their 
mirth that cut me to the heart: it was so 
hollow, so unnatural ; not an atom of real , 
merriment underlying it. 

The carousing and gambling began again. 
I sat buried in my own dark thoughts, as I 
watched this strange scene. At length I 
summoned up courage to address the land- 
lord. 

" What sort of a house is this ?" I asked 
timidly. 

" It is mine/' was the reply. 

Now this was no answer to my question ; 
so, after a pause, I said again, " How has this 
house ... all this . . . come to be ?" 

Some moments elapsed before he deigned 
to reply, during which he kept regarding me 
with a strange expression of countenance. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 13 

" How has it come to be ? . . . Yah ! I thought 
it, blockhead . . . that 's how it came to be !" 

A new light burst on me. The house, then, 
was only a conception. 

" Yes, comrade!" exclaimed one of the 
guests, turning round from the card-table, 
" here we all are in the land of enchantment, 
about which there are so many stories in the 
world. No sooner have we conceived the idea 
of anything, than it is ours. . . . Hurrah for 
jollity, I say !" and with a hideous grimace, 
that betokened anything else than merriment, 
he rattled the dice on the board. 

It was all plain now. The house was un- 
real; the fire without warmth; the tapers 
without light; the cards, dice, and strong 
liquor, — in short, everything, down to the 
very patch on the landlord's white apron, 
where the bunch of keys that dangled there 
had worn a hole, was all unreal. 

There was one thing, however, that was real ; 
the terrible instinct that compelled these sha- 
dowy beings to carry on in the spirit and in ap- 
pearance what they had done in the flesh and 
in real earnest. The landlord to keep a de- 
bauched tavern ; the guests to gamble, drink, 
and curse. Though bitter despair is in their 
hearts, they are impelled to assume an appear- 
ance of merriment. It was terrible. Oh ! 



14 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

more than terrible. I looked down at myself. 
This dress, then, I wore, which was insufficient 
to hide my nakedness, or give me warmth, 
was nothing but ... a conjuring of my fancy. 
" Away ! away ! " a voice sounded within me. 
Oh ! that I could fly away ! . . . away from 
myself ! . . . I could but leave my dressing 
gown behind me, and dash on once again in 
my nakedness, while a demoniac laughter, like 
the hoarse distant croaking of frogs, sounded 
in my ears. 

How long my restless spirit rambled on, I 
cannot say. I experienced many things on 
my journey ; delusions of course ; but still I 
lived through much that was, not useful per- 
haps, but unfortunately a necessity. The light 
was my goal. It seemed to grow fainter. 
Was this, too, a delusion ? No, there could 
be no doubt that it was fading ; for now there 
was nothing but a faint dusky twilight ; soon 
it would be pitchy dark. 

I withdrew into myself out of reach of the 
well-peopled world of death. It is impossible 
for you, who live on the world above, to com- 
prehend how far a person can withdraw into 
his own self. 

I had sat thus for a long while, crouched 
up like a toad in a hole, when all at once my 
attention was aroused by hearing a deep sigh 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 15 

close to Hie. I started to my feet, and looked 
nervously about. There was just sufficient 
light left to be able to discern the outline of a 
hideous fprm, crouching down but a few feet 
from me, and eyeing me with a stealthy glance. 
The features were marvellously contracted. 
A cord was tied round the neck, with one end 
of which its hands were incessantly playing. 
Now and then it put a hand up to its throat 
as if to loosen the noose, by running the fore- 
finger round its neck underneath the cord. 
All the while it spoke not a word, but kept 
staring at me intently, as if. the eyes would 
have started from their very sockets. 

" The light is fading fast," I presently re- 
marked, pointing in the direction where a 
faint glow was still visible ; " 't will soon 
be dark, I suppose." 

" Yes," it answered, in a thick tone ; " The 
night is at hand ! " 

" How long will it last ?" I inquired. 

"How long? — Maybe a couple of hours, 
maybe centuries ! Of its duration none can 
form any idea; but long it always is," 
added the form, with a terrible groan. 

" But surely the day will come back once 
more ? " 

" Yes ; if you call that day, which on earth 
is named twilight. . . . Lighter than that it 



r 



16 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

never is here. — I have a strong suspicion that 
there is no such thing as day. But, after 
all, what does it matter? But you are a 
stranger here, surely ? " 

It was my turn to sigh now, as I answered, 
" Yes ! I died but a short while back ! " 

" A natural death ?" it inquired earnestly. 

"Yes! of course!" 

My answer did not seem to please the shade, 
for it made fearful grimaces, and was silent 
for a long time, while, for my part, I felt no 
desire to continue the conversation. But 
presently it began again : 

" It is so dreadful to go about with one's life 
in one's own hands, as I am doing. Never 
a moment's rest; always on the move. All 
are bent on taking away my life. You too, 
you would take it. I can see it in your 
eyes; but as yet you are too bewildered to 
entertain any evil purpose. Do you see this 
rope ? It all depends on no one getting hold 
of the end of it ; and, therefore, I never let 
it go out of my hand. Oh ! if any one did 
get hold of it. Presto ! I should be swung 
up in a twinkling !" 

After a long pause, the spirit continued : 
" Of course it is all illusion on my part, and 
sheer nonsense. I know that well enough, 
when I am myself. No one can take away 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 17 

my life, for the good reason that no one can 
take what does not exist. But I cannot 
help it. When this childish nervousness 
comes over me, I am forced to run as if I had 
a thousand lives to lose, and Hell were full of 
murderers." 

With a deep sigh, the ghost finished his 
tale, and loosening the cord round his neck, 
fell into a deep reverie. 

Thus we sat together for a while. • But 
presently, by accident, I chanced to move my 
arm in the direction of my unfortunate com- 
rade. Thinking, probably, that I was about 
to seize hold of the end of the rope, he vanished 
in the twinkling of an eye. 



VOL. I. 



18 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER II. 

I remained sitting where I was. Soon the 
darkness quite enveloped me. Soon, do 
I say ? Fool ! how know I whether the 
time was long or short ? All I do know is 
that it fell with an ever-increasing speed and 
intensity, till, at last, it was pitchy dark. 
I say now at last ; before, I said soon. Ah ! 
how little capable am I to judge of time. 

But what darkness it was ! Mortals can form 
no idea of it. In the world one is used to say, 
" the darkness is so thick one can almost feel 
it, or cut it with a knife." Alas ! this com- 
parison does not suffice for Hell. There the 
darkness is so thick and intense that it crushes 
one down with a weight of hundreds of pounds. 
It leaves no space to stir in. It hems one in 
on all sides with an oppressive, though not 
really tangible, weight. Now I began to realize 
the meaning of those words, " outermost 
darkness." Anything more extreme cannot 
be imagined. 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 19 

And there I sat, crouched down in the very 
smallest space, shuddering from cold and fright, 
— I, who but a little while ago had the whole 
world before me, and had rejoiced in my 
strength. I said from cold, but within me 
was a consuming fire. " Their fire is not 
quenched ; their worm dieth not !" Oh, terrible 
truth! 

The torture of Hell consists in these very op- 
posite®. In external cold, howling and gnash- 
ing of teeth ; and a consuming fire within ; 
a drought compared with which the drought 
of Sahara must be a cooling refreshment. 
And then that terror — that nervous feeling ! 
It was .one of the first experiences I gathered, 
and I gathered it unaided. As darkness draws 
on, the dread of death falls on all the denizens 
of Hell ; and as the former increases in inten- 
sity, so does the other, till at last one is ready 
to expire from sheer fright. 

Expire ! . . . An illusion again ! No death- 
struggle is there here, 'tis but a shadowy 
repetition of it. Oh, the groans and bowl- 
ings the lost soul then ejaculates ! The moans 
of despair ! but they are never heard ! 

Have you ever known what it is to toss 
the whole livelong night on your bed, racked 
with bitter remorse, sad reminiscences, or 
even with mere sorrow and anxiety for the 



•^ 



20 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

future? Know, then, that that is joy su- 
preme compared to what we undergo. And 
at length you become weary of reproaching 
yourself. Nature asserted her sway, and, 
happy mortal, you fell, into a refreshing 
sleep. You forgot all your misery ; the acuter 
your suffering, the deeper was your slumber ; 
and, when you awoke, a new and blessed day 
had arisen over you, with fresh grace, fresh 
hopes! • 

Oh, happy, thrice happy! ,Yes! such. do 
I rightly term you, whatever be your suffer- 
ing ; however low or miserable your condition 
in the world. For reflect ! The most mise- 
rable being on the face of the earth is, happy 
indeed compared with one of us, if he would 
only take his misfortune at its real value. 
Yes! wonderful as it may sound, on earth, 
though it is a world of realities, unhappiness 
is, to a great extent, imaginary ; bnt here in* 
Hell, though a land of shades and phantoms, 
it is awfully real. In the world it depends so 
much on the way in which a man meets his 
misfortunes. Here there is only one way of 
meeting them, the stern, inflexible way of 
necessity. One does not meet them after all ; 
they are imposed. 

Oh, for one moment's slumber, one moment's 
oblivion ! What joy ! what blessedness ! 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 21 

Alas ! I do but increase my torments. My 
tears stream down as I write, but tbey are not 
of that description that can stain the paper. 
They fall like drops of molten lead on my 
soul. Tears did I say? Pooh! believe it 
not, it was but a figure of speech ! 

There I sat that long, endless night, death- 
night I should call it — in distinction to the dark 
and fearful nights I have passed on earth — 
for a deathlike chill shuddered through me ; 
while within a fire burned, a fire that can 
never be quenched. And it had a twofold 
flame. For the sins I had committed, and the 
desires I had conceived, glowed hot and fierce 
within. Which was the most agonizing of 
the two I am unable to say ; only this I know, 
that they raged as it were by turns, and my 
thoughts, like a breath of wind, fanned them 
into flame. 

My sins ! Of what avail to speak of them 
now? And yet I must. My sinful life is 
ended. It lies before me in fearful distinctness, 
not only as regards its whole career, but in its 
very minutest parts. That I am, or rather 
was, a sinner, has not forced itself upon me 
now for the first time. I have always known 
it ; but with a cunning and address, betokening 
not so much any adroitness on my side as on 
the Devil's, I knew how to keep the con vie- 



22 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

tion down, if not quite in subjection, as long 
as I was alive. I was unable to destroy it 
entirely, but kept it chained so close a prisoner, 
that to all intents and purposes it might have 
been reckoned among the dead ; and if ever 
its voice would make itself heard, it was but 
as a gentle whisper, to which it was needless 
to give any heed. 

But I could even do more. By degrees I 
learnt how to cast my sins behind me, and 
to forget them as completely as if they had 
never existed. 

But now ! Oh ! now ! 

This obliviousness was but a juggling 
devilish trick. They all stand in array before 
me ; not one is wanting ! On the contrary, 
there are many more than ever I would ac- 
knowledge in the world. There were a thou- 
sand things which I counted as nothing, but 
which now rise up against me, and condemn 
me. I can see myself with a clearness, to 
which I was a stranger before. My whole 
life is reflected in a mirror, in all its particular 
and separate parts. A perfect sketch of it 
traced in the finest and most delicate outline 
lies before me, no line so faint, no point so 
diminutive, but that it catches my eye. My 
tortured soul roams hither ahd thither, writh- 
ing and twisting if haply it can find a place, 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 23 

however small, where to rest awhile, if only 
for one instant. But it is in vain ! 

And yet I have never been what the world 
would call a bad man. No, no ; far from it. 
Thoroughly selfish, yet not naturally devoid 
of sympathy; of strong appetites, yet not 
without refined ideas ; of violent passions, but 
far too well bred to commit myself in any way. 
Affable, courteous, ready to assist; on the 
whole, goodhearted, as long as my passions 
did not blind me ; I was <not only a general 
favourite, but I may say was universally 
esteemed. In short, I was a man of the world. 
And yet it was far from my intention to let the 
world use me ; on the contrary, it was my firm 
determination to make use of it Without 
faith, without any other object in view save 
that of the passing hour, I lived for enjoy- 
ment alone. Without faith did I say ? But 
that is not quite correct. For, as a child, I 
possessed an inward, lively faith, but when I 
came out into the world it could not survive. 
In the mad career of youth it faded away. At 
a certain period of my life, indeed, it seemed 
as if it were about to bud forth again. But 
when everything else suffered shipwreck, it 
too was sucked down in the whirl. And yet 
I could never quile eradicate it. Who knows 
but that I should have done so had I been 



24 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

able ? Up to my very death, the feeling that 
I still had somewhat of the religion of child- 
hood lingering within me remained. 

I lived, breathed only in my passions. Do 
you care to know what they were ? They were 
more numerous than I can mention ; but the 
chief of them were, a good table, high play, 
beautiful women, and piquant adventures. 

Oh, how they burn ! True, they burnt in 
the world; but they caused me no pain, or 
rather it was an exquisite, a voluptuous pain. 
But now . . ? 

If you have any notion of what the dry 
drought is, you might possibly be able to form 
a faint idea of my sufferings. 

I feel a consuming drought within. I suffer 
under an incessant internal burning. To be 
burnt, indeed, at the stake would be pleasure 
compared to this, because there would be an 
end to it. But here there is no end ! Can you 
form any idea about it now ? It is not, it is 
true, always equally intense, for that would be 
against nature. Yet it is but a poor conso- 
lation ; it is always greater than it is possible 
to describe. 

But let me quit the sufferings I underwent 
that first night. Strange that I should blush 
to tell what I have now to narrate. There is 

peculiar remorse attached to it, a remorse 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 25 

which I have to myself alone ; but doubtless 
most of those in Hell would say the same of 
themselves; but it is a remorse which has 
never abandoned me a single instant since I 
have raised my eyes in torment. A whole 
history is attached to it, but one of those 
histories that penetrate deeper into the soul 
than any one would suppose. 

I celebrated the anniversary of my thirty- 
first birthday in a little country inn in a 
foreign land. I was returning home after an 
absence of rather more than a year. I had 
been- to the East — in the most unhappy frame 
of mind it is possible to conceive, broken down 
with grief and sorrow, and mourning for the 
loss of a blighted love. We had set out three 
in number ; but two returned ; and now we 
were but a two days! journey from home, 
when a tremendous storm compelled us to 
seek shelter in this wretched inn. 

But strange things occur in the world! 
Here, in this very inn, I was destined to meet 
with the first object that could arouse a feeling 
of sympathy within me for many months past* 
It was a ragged boy of some eight or nine 
years old. His mother, it seemed, had be- 
longed to some circus troupe, and had recently 
drowned herself in a neighbouring swamp. 
He was a dirty, ill-mannered, untractable 



26 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

child, and would not be consoled. He had 
loved tenderly, passionately, to the exclusion 
of every other object save one. Had not I ? 
He had lost everything that bound him to 
earth. So had I ! But this was not all. 
Line by line the child's being spoke to my 
dullened senses in a marvellous way. 

His passionateness ; his reserved, timid dis- 
position ; yes, even his ungovernable temper, 
touched a chord in my own heart. It seemed 
to me that I should have acted just as he did. 
And yet for all his rags and filth he was a 
handsome boy. His dark tearful eyes had an 
expression about them that went straight to 
the heart; and his thick tangled masses of 
hair enveloped a face which, without possess- 
ing any regular features, was yet in a high 
degree attractive. His was one of the boyish 
faces Murillo would have loved to paint. 
What more need I add, except that the first 
glance at him made my heart yearn towards 
him ? No one else would have him ; so I took 
him. But had I been obliged to have paid 
dearly for him, he should not have escaped 
me. 

His mother had been known by the name of 
Rosalinda : a name, doubtless, assumed in the 
circus. But the boy knew of none other name. 
Nothing was found on her person, not a relic 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 27 

that could throw any light upon the matter. 
Had any such ever existed it must have been 
lost with the wretched woman under the dark 
waters of the morass. In fact the only thing 
to which any hope of discovering a clue was 
attached was a mark indelibly tattooed on the 
boy's right arm. It resembled a swan, and 
some unintelligible hieroglyphics were at- 
tached to it. The boy's name was Martin. 
He spoke a mixed, impure language of which 
my own native tongue formed but a minor 
part. 

I took the boy, then, with me ; but not 
without being obliged to use force. 

We had left home three in number; and 
three of us returned. But, God ! what an 
exchange ! 

He grew up under my eye, a child without 
extraction, without a name. No clue as to his 
origin was ever discovered, but still the lad 
felt convinced, and the conviction strengthened 
with his years, that the mark on his right arm 
would some day or other be the means of clear- 
ing up the mystery of his birth. 

He had no small ideas of himself. I never 
allowed him out of my sight. People said I 
had got a plaything in the pretty child, and 
perhaps there was some truth in the remark. 
For the animal nature in him was strong, and 



28 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

developed itself with astounding precocity, at 
the expense in a great degree of his moral 
nature. 

Possessed of strong instincts and passions, 
with a remarkable amount of self-will about 
him, he was by no means a manageable boy. 
But it afforded me amusement to irritate and 
excite them, at one time by letting them have 
free play ; and again, at another, by keeping a 
tight check upon them. But he was more 
than a plaything to me ; my heart had, indeed, 
turned towards him, had, in a word, adopted 
him for its own. Possibly the cause of this 
was that I hoped to find an exact counterpart 
of myself in him ; or, possibly, it was a mere 
whim of mine that had brought about this 
strange connection ; one thing, however, was 
certain, I came to love him : and those persons 
I have loved in the world, besides myself, 
might very easily be counted up. 

And he returned my affection with a burn- 
ing, passionate, ungovernable love. If I ex- 
asperated him merely to gratify myself, and 
ended by placing my foot on his neck, when 
he had defied me in the fiercest terms, he would 
at last humble himself so deeply, and twine 
himself round my very knees, so that I have 
actually had to drag him along through the 
very dust. At such moments as these he 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 29 

would willingly have submitted to be trodden 
under foot, or to suffer any indignity at my 
hands, provided I would only assure him of 
my forgiveness, and again take him into 
favour. But I did not treat him thus : I 
neither trod him under foot, neither did I ill- 
treat him in any way. And yet, though the 
harshest treatment would never have brought 
a tear to his eye, he would often hang round 
me, dissolved in tears, as the only being on 
earth who cared for him. And then the tears 
would rise up to my own eyes, and we would 
be friends again. Our attachment towards each 
other, instead of becoming weakened thereby, 
actually flourished the more vigorously. Thus 
matters went on between us ; at one time the 
bitterest, wildest passion ; at another, the ten- 
derest, most endearing love, till at last it flashed 
on me that he was a boy no longer. Soon he 
grew up into a man like myself, with strong 
passions, with great" self-love. 

It. was an exceptional case on both sides 
for us* to love each other. 

A scene at length occurred between us, 
worse than any of the former ones. He had 
offered me defiance on a matter which I could 
not brook, and I had as good as spurned him 
from me. How dared the fellow presume to 
be my rival ? 



30 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

He had left me, smarting from the treatment 
he had received, but unyielding, breathing out 
threats that he would never return. And he 
kept his word. At a subsequent period I re- 
ceived a letter from him, in which he gave me 
the choice either of making way for him or 
of losing him for ever, coupled with a threat 
that he would engage himself in the service of 
some semi-barbarous state. I made no reply 
to his ultimatum ; it was so plainly his duty* 
to humble himself and to give way to me. 
Time sped swiftly by, and I began really to 
think that I had lost him. If I were to 
say I suffered no uneasiness at the thought, 
I should be giving utterance to a falsehood. 
Yes, I did feel remorse, anguish, sorrow, for 
I loved him still ; and my heart whispered to 
me that if he went to ruin 'I should be his 
destroyer. 

Then I fell ill. It was the first illness I had 
ever undergone, and it was also my last. On 
my sick-bed, contrary to all expectations, I re- 
ceived another letter from him. Its meaning 
was obscure, but the spirit that breathed 
through it was plain enough. I was more 
than astounded. He actually acknowledged 
himself to be in error, and was tractable, mild, 
and gentle in his expressions, as I had never 
known him to be before. He prayed for an 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 31 

interview ; he would return " as the lost, re- 
pentant son. He had things to communicate 
which must needs do away with all dissension 
between us. A higher power had judged be- 
tween us." He also alluded to her in his letter. 
But his style was so abrupt and confused that 
it was impossible to decide whether the ex- 
planation he had to offer referred to himself 
or to her. 

But he never received any answer to this 
letter either. I was already too weak to write, 
and I could not trust any one else to do it for 
me. Fool that I was, I fondly hoped to be 
myself again in a day or two. 

What explanations had he to offer ? What 
was the cause of this wonderful change in 
him ? Was it himself or her he referred to ? 

These questions tortured me till the time 
when I drew my last breath. Perhaps they 
hastened my end. They followed me to Hell, 
and torment me more than aught else ; for 
other matters at times slip out of my thoughts ; 
but this question, "What did he want with 
me ?" never leaves me. It burns like a fire- 
brand on my soul. And that it resolved itself 
into many other such questions as these : " Did 
it refer to him or to her ? How had it fared 
with him, spurned by the only being who had 
ever shown him any love? Was I the cause 



32 LETTERS FROM HELL, 

of his ruin V did not make the pain one whit 
the less. 

Oh, woe, woe ! These questions are a Hell 
in themselves. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 33 



CHAPTER III. 

How long I sat buried as it were in myself 
and darkness, how long this night of perdition 
lasted, I cannot say. Even if there could be 
any mention of time in Hell, there is naught 
whereby to measure it. It may have been 
years, or it may only have been hours. But 
one thing is certain, I lived over again that 
night the whole of my wretched earthly career. 

Can you realize my meaning ? 

At last the dawn began to re-appear, but so 
slowly I cannot describe it. Little by little 
the darkness became less dense ; a faint light 
glimmered through it ; imperceptibly it in- 
creased in brightness, till at length I was able 
to discern the objects around. This time of 
expectation, if I may so term it, was the least 
painful I have yet experienced in Hell ; for a 
shadow of oblivion fell on me while I was 
craving for the returning light. And what 
blessing greater than oblivion here ? I said 
light ! But, alas, it is never light here ! Neither 

VOL. I. D 



34 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

is there such a thing as oblivion ! It was but 
a fond imagination. 

But it cheered me up, and put fresh power 
into me. Then I gathered myself up and 
set off again in the direction of the rising 
dawn. How long, and how far I went, has 
nothing to do with it ; suffice it to say, I was 
soon enough in the middle of Hell's misery, 
and had found my proper place. Then again 
might I rest myself awhile. Rest ! Once for 
all I must beg you not to be misled by such 
foolish * expressions, which the force of old 
habit makes me employ. For of course there 
can be no such thing really as rest here. 

It is wonderful how quickly I found out my 
proper position ; how quickly I adapted my- 
self to the conditions of the place. Instinc- 
tively I did as the others did, acting all the 
while in accordance with my own peculiar 
individuality. Thus I contributed my part to 
make Hell a shadowy and distorted image of 
the world above. I could not have acted 
otherwise than I did, even had I felt con- 
vinced that it was to my infamy and disgrace. 

For every one feels an irresistible impulse to 
carry out the same sinful predilections he had 
in the world. And every one can obtain what 
he desires. He has only to conceive the idea, 
and lo! he is in possession of the reality. 



LETTEKS FROM HELL. 35 

Thus passions and lusts are as prevalent here 
as ever they were in the world, only far 
more frightful. 

In the world their hideousness was con- 
cealed under a fair outside covering of the 
flesh; but here they are arrayed like skele- 
tons, bidding defiance to all nature in their 
carnal lusts, desiring everything they ever 
have desired, but in reality attaining nothing 
except to grin at each other. All here is 
hollow and empty, devoid of truthfulness and 
reality, incapable of affording satisfaction. It 
is just in this very thing our torture consists : 
in the compulsion to surround ourselves with 
this essence of vanity ; in the obligation to de- 
vote ourselves to this empty unreality. And, 
however lively our convictions may be that all 
is void, all is vain ; however great the repug- 
nance we feel, we must bow and bend ourselves . 
to it ; we are forced without cessation to strive 
to become what we have been before. 

If a number of spirits unite in the wish, 
"Here shall be a town," it is accomplished. 
Every one co-operates in the work, according to 
the impulses of his individual entity, and the 
town is built. 

Or is it a church they desire, or a theatre, 
or a promenade ; a forest, or a lake ; or a 
mountain range, the wish is realized at once. 



36 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

And not only does each individual see what 
his own vanity has produced, hut it is patent 
to every one else. And yet they are naught 
but shadows altogether. Nay, even this ex- 
pression has too much reality — they are mere 
imaginations. 

There is never any lack of subservient 
spirits to place all this phantom-work upon 
the stage. 

If any one wishes to build himself a palace 
and keep a magnificent establishment, he can 
have the choice amongst unfaithful stewards, 
thievish butlers, and deceitful servants in 
abundance. It might be supposed that there 
would be found but few willing to undertake 
such subordinate positions ; such, however, is 
not the case ; habits brought down from the 
world above decide the matter. 

Or should any one have a desire to raise an 
army (provided, of course, that he has com- 
manded one previously, for without reputation 
the attempt would be a signal failure), he will 
find numbers of braggadocios and bloodthirsty 
vagabonds, who are fit for nothing else. Or 
should his tastes lie in the direction of a 
harem, he will find an incredible number of 
obliging females, both with and without the 
title of lost women. And so on to infinity. 

After these explanatory remarks you will 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 37 

not be surprised to hear that I still reside as # 
formerly at my tasteful villa on the banks of 

, that I keep up a fine establishment, and 

live at a high rate. 

As of old, I am wedded to society, with all 
its visible and secret charms. Indeed, few 
persons have had such an intimate acquaint- 
ance with this source of enjoyment as inyself, 
or have made the use of it I have done. But 
now — I do not say pity me, my friend, for 
your sympathy could do me no good — but I 
only say you have here the misery of Hell 
pourtrayed in these few words, " I will take 
my fill of pleasure, I will revel in enjoyment 
as of old, and yet experience no sense of 
pleasure, no feeling of enjoyment." Is it not 
folly ? But such, such alas, is the case ! 

I have found many acquaintances, and a fair 
number of friends, but no greetings have passed 
between us yet. I have not yet forgotten how 
fine the feeling of the world is. It would 
be wrong to lay the blame on the poor fami- 
lies ; besides, it could give them no pleasure. 

However great saints those who have de- 
parted may be accounted in the world above, 
they will not find the pains of Hell to be less 

real. 

• 

Dare I venture upon a description of Hell ? 
Is it capable of being described? I almost 



40 LETTERS PROM HELL, 

out the whole extent of Hell. You think, per- 
haps, of Lethe, Alas ! no, my friend ; it is no 
such Lethe, a draught from whose waters can 
produce oblivion, Lethe is but a fable, while 
this is a hideous reality. It has its source in 
the world above ; all the lies and wickedness 
of earth float down on its current. Maybe 
that is why its water is so black and slimy : 
often it resembles congealed blood. At irre- 
gular intervals it swells and overflows its 
banks, when some monstrous falsehood or 
crime is hatched in the world above ; then its 
waters pour over its banks, leaving behind 
them a putrid mass of pestiferous mud. The 
stench is scarcely bearable; but we, hardy 
spirits that we are, can bear all things ! 

To the best of my recollection, I have already 
alluded to the suffocating nausea we suffer 
from continually. It is not surprising. 

All the vanity of the world descends direct 
to Hell, and forms an atmosphere around us. 
The greater the amount, the thicker the atmo- 
sphere, and the more oppressive the feeling of 
nausea. If one could only vomit ! But that is 
impossible. Otherwise, one would vomit up the 
world, which fills one to repletion ; one would 
vomit up one's own self, and thus the torments 
of Hell would come to an end. You see 
I am a logician still, Alas, God help me ! 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 41 

Sometimes we have rain and snow ! It is 
when follies and vanities accumulate to a more 
than ordinary degree in the world, (and it 
can endure a large amount of them ; it is its 
nature,) and it can bear no more ; then the 
surplus falls down into Hell, and, according to 
an old custom, it is said to rain or snow. 

Not only do events observe a certain chro- 
nological, but also a political order here. 
Neither are the sympathies quite excluded. 
Generations dwell here as it were in layers or 
strata; those spirits that belong to the same 
age usually herding together. But still, race, 
and the development of civilization, make 
themselves apparent even here. The last 
arrivals naturally occupy the outermost places, 
but as fresh crowds are ever pressing on, the 
first-comers draw back. Of course, there are 
many exceptions to these rules. Those who 
have followed out the same lines of thought, 
and the same pursuits, naturally flock together 
here, though they may have belonged to dif- 
ferent races of people, and to periods widely 
remote. 

Frequently, also, these persons compose a 
whole by themselves, who had formed an ex- 
clusive social circle in the world above, or be- 
longed to certain definite periods. Thus, there 
is a a City of Unrighteousness," called also the 



42 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

"City of Politicians;" a " Town of the Holy 
Inquisition ;" a " City of the Jews ;" of " the 
Mormons," " Sodomites," " Pre-Noachians," 
&c. Hell thus, in a great measure, assumes 
the appearance of a colonized land. Inclina- 
tion and caprice, I should add, play as great a 
part here as in the world above. 

Gradually I have learnt to know the laws 
that prevail here. They are as simple as they 
are natural. Desire and remorse keep the 
whole in motion. I was nearly substituting 
repentance, but that is a word of whose mean- 
ing we know nothing. Our torment is of a 
twofold nature, but the result is only one. 
Some have to follow after the same lusts and 
desires which they followed on earth, and yet 
never be satisfied ; or practise the same evil 
deeds as of old, but with ineffable disgust and 
aversion to themselves. 

The covetous man, for instance, can think 
of nothing but his gold still ; the unclean man 
only of his uncleanness ; the gluttonous man 
only of his appetite ; the murderer only of his 
foul bloody deed. Others, again, are con- 
strained to follow after those very things 
which they neglected in the world, and are 
tormented with a longing to make good and 
to restore, knowing all the while that it is in 
vain. The unrighteous man thinks only of 



LETTEBS FBOM HELL. 43 

repairing his unrighteous deeds ; the unmer- 
ciful only of exercising mercy ; the unnatural 
mother's thoughts are now centred on her 
poor children; while the self-murderers sole 
anxiety is now to save his life. 

All are compelled either to do as they did 
on earth, but ought not to have done ; to aim 
after those things that once were their aim, but 
unlawfully so. Or inversely, to do those things 
they left undone on earth, but ought to have 
performed; or to follow after those which 
they wilfully omitted, but ought to have fol- 
lowed after. 

But the sufferings of Hell must not be re- 
garded in the light of a punishment. Punish- 
ment is yet impending ; first comes the Judg- 
ment. No, it is but the direct consequence of 
our life on earth. Ye that are still alive, 
think, I pray you, on these things. Every- 
thing, be it ever so small, has consequences 
attached to it, which extend far, far beyond the 
boundaries of an earthly life into the very 
depths of Hell : of the kingdom of Heaven I 
can say nothing. If then the simple conse- 
quences are so fearful, what must the punish- 
ment itself be ? 

The law then, the fearful fundamental law 
that obtains in Hell, is, that we are not tor- 
mented, but that we torment ourselves. But 



44 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

notice the point from which everything issues, 
and on which finally everything depends, 
namely, whether we have lived in the faith of 
God's Son, who once gave Himself for us. Our 
iniquities weigh down the scale in proportion 
as they have stood in the way of our faith, or 
have testified against it. Do not be surprised 
that I name the name of God. Alas, He is 
still our God ! And in the same way I name 
the name of God's Son. We know that God 
has a Son, who once came into the world to 
save sinners, and that He loved the lost sheep 
unto death, even the death of the cross. But, 
for all that, we know naught of salvation, or 
redemption; all is forgotten, even to the 
Saviour's very name. We often waste our 
strength in agonizing endeavours to recall, 
if it were only a particle of it. But all in 
vain ; not -even His name. Oh, if we could 
only remember that name, and be able to pro- 
nounce it, then we should be saved indeed! 
I do not doubt it for an instant. But woe, 
woe ! It is too late ! 

On the whole, what I have forgotten is 
enormous. I might well say I have forgotten 
everything except myself. Yes, I speak cor- 
rectly, for I have not forgotten myself. On 
the contrary, I remember everything con- 
nected with my life with a degree of precision 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 45 

as painful as it is wonderful. But what was 
once, as it were, attached to my being has 
disappeared. Intelligence, accomplishments, 
talents, with all the other ornaments of Mam- 
mon and the flesh, have disappeared together. 
It is not so wonderful then that this feeling 
of nakedness is so vividly impressed on me. 

Yes, only myself remains. And when I 
inquire of what this individuality of mine 
consists, I find only burning remorse that can 
never be quenched ; ardent desires that can 
never be satisfied ; a foolish longing after 
what is lost, and can never be found ; an im- 
measurable amount of recollections, small and 
great, which are bitter and painful in the 
mass. 

There you have me exactly as I am, 
God, my Grod, in the torments of Hell ! 



46 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER IV. 

I was not brought up under the most happy 
conditions. My parents were an ill-matched, 
ill-assorted pair. Indeed, it was a very general 
remark among people, " that it was a wonder 
they ever could have married." My father 
was a plain, simple-minded man, retiring and 
unpretentious in his manner. He was the 
head of a very renowned mercantile and 
manufacturing firm ; but, for all this, to out- 
ward appearance, he seemed a very unim- 
portant personage. 

As far back as I can remember, my mother, 
who was the most important of the two in my 
eyes, was, in every sense of the word, a lady. 
She was strikingly beautiful, and retained her 
good looks for a very long time. Possibly the 
reason of this was that she had been a stranger 
to any great passions. Some people, indeed, 
called her cold and apathetic, and there was 
doubtless some truth in the remark ; but they 
would have committed a great error had they 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 47 

said she had no will of her own, or was devoid 
of energy. For though the former never cer- 
tainly showed itself in any repulsive manner, 
I do not believe it had ever been bent. Who, 
indeed, could have bent it, when I her only, 
her darling child, was powerless to do so. 
.And she was just as clever as she was decided 
and firm. 

She was universally admired ; I cannot say 
beloved. Perhaps no one really loved her but 
myself ! Did I love my mother ? If I were 
to give a truthful answer to this question, I 
should have to own that I too admired her 
more than I loved her. And Well did she de- 
serve this admiration. Much as I have seen 
of the world, I have never met with any other 
woman who so entirely came up to my ideas 
of what a lady ought to be. She was per- 
fection realized ; perfect in beauty ; perfect in 
manner, carriage, and bearing ; perfect in 
dress ; perfect in all the customs of the world 
perfect in the due discharge of her duties; 
and perfect in her conduct, in Christian piety 
and devotion. 

In all things she was a model for imita- 
tion ; free from spot or stain. She never gave 
offence ; never said, or did, or sanctioned any- 
thing that was not right. 

In fine, I might say that my mother was 



48 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

perfect even to the very minutest fold of her 
dress. And she enjoyed this reputation to a 
ripe old age ; and even then her pretty looks 
were loth to leave her. 

When I look back, I can see her, as I can 
see everything else, far more clearly than I 
could then. It is no longer a secret to me 
that she was greatly influenced by the world. 
The world was her pattern, and this was why 
she had developed herself to such perfection. 

I do not mean to imply by this that she was 
anyways deficient in her appreciation of re- 
ligion, or of her higher duties. On .the con- 
trary, I venture to say few persons have kept 
God's commandments so closely before their 
eyes. 

She honoured the clergy ; the church was, 
as it were, a second home to her ; no one ever 
left her without being satisfied one way or 
another. Duty and propriety walked hand 
in hand by her side through the whole of her 
life. 

Our house was, as it were, divided into two. 
In one my mother was at home, in the other 
my father. Thus they were like two circles 
that barely touch each other. I did not stand 
midway between the two, but as my mother's 
petted darling belonged to the higher circle. 
I seldom came in contact with my father. 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 49 

His quiet, serious nature, his calm, searching 
look, made me shun him. Neither did he 
take much notice of me, though I doubt not 
but that I was really dear to him. 

My mother's circle was a refined one ; she 
was fond of gaiety. My father, however, 
seldom took any part in it ; and whenever he 
did I could not help feeling rather ashamed of 
him. For, though master of the house, he 
was extremely simple and retiring in his 
manner. Indeed, the greater part of his time 
was spent in the counting-house, the factory, 
or the warehouse. 

My aunt on my father's side was ,the very 
reverse of my. mother. She was an old maid, 
eccentric in character, and composed of ancn 
malies, infirmities, and peculiarities. In all 
respects save one she was not to be relied on, 
and she was constantly over-stepping the mark 
in all directions. She was overstrained, capri- 
cious, and was always committing herself. A 
lady, properly speaking, she was not, but at 
times the whim would seize her to act the part 
of one. It was, however, merely an assumed 
character, one which she quickly abandoned. 
And yet, with all this, she was natural to a 
rare degree ; her heart was ever on her lips % 
She was extremely naive, and her manner of 
talking so droll, that she was, as she herself 

VOL. I. E 



50 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

saidj the only one who could enliven my 
serious, quiet father. And this was a duty 
she faithfully accomplished. Aunt Betty was 
far from being perfection. In the eyes of the 
world, which, by the way, but seldom caught 
a glimpse of her, she was, to use a mild ex- 
pression, considered to be a queer sort of per- 
son. She only possessed one thing in perfec- 
tion; and that was a heart, streaming over 
with love, prepared for any sacrifice ; a heart 
whose nature and privilege it was to deny 
itself to promote the happiness of other people. 
On herself she never bestowed a thought. 
And her heart was full of a faith as deep, as 
lively, as simple, as a little child's. Of course 
she had her ups and downs in life ; but her 
heart was always in its right place. And 
God dwelt in her heart. At times she often 
got into great confusion about her duties, and 
ran amuck of the commandments ; but for all 
that the great commandment always stood out 
clearly before her eyes, containing in itself all 
the other commandments, and all the duties of 
life— " Love God ; Love one another." 

She had never been separated from my father 
from earliest childhood. Now she managed 
the household ; for it was a large house, and 
possessed, as it were, two manages. 

If I were to compare her with Cinderella, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 51 

the simile, though not strictly correct, would 
still contain a good deal of truth. For while 
in domestic affairs her sway was acknowledged 
she was still everybody's servant. All the 
troubles and annoyances fell to her lot; she 
wore herself out for the house. But it was 
entirely her own doing ; for if any one ever 
remonstrated she would become quite refrac- 
tory, though usually of such a mild, amiable 
disposition. My lady-like mother never put 
finger to anything ; to my aunt was entrusted 
the care of the whole establishment, of my 
father included. In a word, she was virtually 
mistress. To try and economize, to work, and 
to worry herself, were among the least of the 
burdens she had to endure ; for she felt herself 
called on to bear the sorrows, pains, and 
troubles of the whole family. She took the 
blame of everything, and voluntarily made 
herself a scape-goat for the omissions and 
commissions of everybody else. All this she 
looked upon as the part assigned to her to 
fulfill in the world. She it was who acted as 
mediator between my parents, surpassing all 
t>f us in cleverness by her great simplicity. 
In truth, she formed a most important con- 
necting link between them. But it was prin- 
cipally to my father she dedicated herself, 
hanging to him with a tenderness so touching 



52 LETTERS PROM HELL, 

that words fail me to describe it. How well 
she understood how to make his comfortless 
home comfortable ; to keep all vexations out 
of sight, and they were not few ; to cheer him 
up with a merry speech which often came 
from a sad heart, in order to bridge over the 
wide space that lay between him and his wife 
— aye, and his child ! 

And how she loved me ! Kind, good soul ! 
My mother petted me, I will not say actually 
spoiled me ; for she was too prudent to do that. 
But I have to thank my aunt for having been 
a good and pious child, notwithstanding all my 
indulgences. It was on her knee I learnt my 
first lesson in holy things; and it took root 
within, as nothing good ever did afterwards. 
Yes, the memory of those days is inexpressibly 
sweet to me, spite of all the bitterness of Hell. 
The attractive power of her love was so great 
that I would often slink away from my 
mother's handsome apartments, where I was 
lord and master, to pass my time with my 
aunt as a poor child, either in the kitchen, or 
in the little room she called her own. They 
were the happiest days I have ever passed. 

Thus I received a sound religious education, 
but I did not owe it to my mother, though she 
was pious, too, after a fashion. But it did not 
strengthen with my growth. I grew up with 



« ,f * 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 53 

strong sensual passions, and at an early age I 
got a taste of the world. 

Aunt Betty died ; she had literally worn 
herself out : affection is often a costly thing. 
Her death made a strong impression on me 
for the time, but it did not last long. 

I was already engaged in the business of 
the office. My mother had made up her mind 
that I should follow a military, or, if possible, a 
diplomatic career. In good looks I took after 
her \ wealth I should inherit from my father, 
and in other respects I was by no means de- 
ficient. She was proud of me, and wished to 
see me distinguish myself in the world* But 
though my father had almost entirely given 
me over to my mother's care, on this point his 
mind was made up. I was to follow his pro- 
fession, and become a steady business man. 

And he was right. I had the gift of fasci- 
nating every one, a dangerous gift forsooth for 
persons of a nature like mine. Not only did 
I find the world ready to embrace me, but it 
literally dragged me to its arms, as the nymphs 
did Hylas. Thus I was ruined before the 
down on my cheek had begun to curl. Bad 
friends I had in numbers, but those of the 
other sex were by far the most dangerous. A 
time of compensation, however, came; from 
being the seduced I soon became the seducer. 



54 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

After I came more under my father's eye 
there was no lack of warnings, reproofs, and 
admonitions on his side. But it was of no 
use. I avoided him, and deceived him. But 
my mother had far greater influence with me. 
On the one hand, she made me feel that she 
was yielding enough to make excuses, and to 
pretend to be blind to my follies ; while on the 
other she knew well how to represent the 
necessity of prudence and propriety in such 
colours as to make me promise to amend ; 
and I actually did amend at her suggestions. 
I curtailed my excesses, and was careful not 
to create a scandal. At first the restraint was 
irksome, for I revelled in brutish lusts and 
passions ; but if these latter were strong, my 
will was strong enough to tame them, and my 
mother's clever way of dealing with me made 
me will. 

My father died when I was about twenty 
years old. He had never been seen to smile 
since Aunt Betty's death, for there was no 
one any longer in the world to make him 
cheerful ! 

I was taken into partnership when still very 
young, under the guidance of my father's 
brother, and shortly afterwards was attacked 
by a severe illness. 

And now I am approaching one of the 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 55 

darkest portions of my life. It is in truth but 
a little matter, dashed off hastily likfr a pencil 
sketch on a pleasure trip, but for all that it 
contains the germ of the bitterest remorse I 
suffer from. If in all other respects I could 
be washed clean, that dark spot would still 
remain. 

When I became convalescent I was ex- 
tremely weak and feeble. It was in the early 
part of the summer. The doctors recom- 
mended a trip into the country ; but I had no 
desire to repair to our country seat, for I was 
capricious and peevish to a degree. Perfect 
repose and quiet were ordered, and certainly 
they were not to be found there. A capri- 
cious whim accidentally decided the matter. 
During the former summer we had made an 
excursion to the sea-side ; and I brought 
before my mind a very small house, situated 
in the middle of a forest, so retired and still 
that it seemed as if Peace itself had taken up 
its dwelling tfcere amidst those cool shadows 
of roses, ivy, and clustering honeysuckle. It 
belonged to some forester. If I went into the 
country at all, I would go there, and nowhere 
else. 

After a great many objections had been 
raised, the matter wap at length arranged, and 
we set out. The old forester was living alone 



56 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

with a daughter who was just emerging into 
womanhood. 

Anna ! Little did' I dream that this name 
would ever ring so terribly in my ears Y 

I regained my strength, but began to get 
tired of the place, pretty though it was ; so to 
relieve the ennui from which I suffered I 
began to make love to Anna. She was 
little more than a farmer's daughter, but 
extremely graceful and unconstrained in 
manner and appearance. It seemed as if 
her whole being was in harmony with the 
surrounding landscape. Like the wood in 
whose midst she lived she was all freshness 
and sweet perfume. Nature could not possibly 
have presented anything more attractive to me 
than this young maid, so unrestrained, I might 
almost say wild, and yet so opposite to every- 
thing coarse or vulgar. We spent the greater 
part of our time in each other's company, for 
her father looked on her but as a child still, 
though she was just seventeen years old. 

She it was who waited on me. But all the 
fine things with which I honoured her were lost 
on her. Light-footed as a deer, easily moved 
to laughter, she was not to be readily caught. 
She took care not to come too near me, not 
that she was afraid of any danger, for she 
suspected none ; but like every free and open 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 57 

nature she shunned bonds and snares. Her 
thoughts were far removed from what is 
termed love. She was contented in herself, 
and supremely happy ; her life was as joyous 
as a bird's, or as a butterfly's among the 
flowers. I have never known a disposition so 
thoroughly joyous, nor a nature so animated 
as hers* Sunshine or rain, she would sing 
under the open heaven; she tripped, as it 
were, through the world. 

But in a devilish mood I said to myself, 
" Wait awhile, my little one ; I will see if I 
cannot tame you." 

I did not fall in love with her, our respective 
positions were too widely apart from each 
other for that. But my passions became 
keenly aroused, and gradually she grew more 
and more attractive to me. 

And at last I succeeded in taming her, after 
having had recourse to numberless artifices. 
So thoroughly did I succeed that no one would 
have recognised her. 

She faded away like a wild flower whose 
stalk has been crushed, or like a bird whose 
wing has been broken. 

Her merry, ringing laugh was silent now ; 
her dauntless bearing was no longer to be 
seen. Quietly and sorrowfully, with downcast 
look and averted gaze, she slunk about. But 



58 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

with a tenderness that had no match, with an 
affection that possessed no bounds, she now 
literally clung to me — me, her destroyer. 

She knew that I had taken away her very 
life. Lost as she was she loved me still, 
though I it was who had been her ruin. 

Then remorse began to fix its sharp talons 
into my heart. For I could not but feel 
affected at the display of so much real love. 
I was not utterly bad then. 

And if she had been charming before, she 
was not the less so now. 

It is true she was not the same person, but 
there was an enchantment in the transforma- 
tion she had undergone. Formerly so free, so 
wild, like one whose neck has never bowed to 
the yoke ; and now humbled, and crushed like 
one who still even kisses the chains that bind 
him. 

I reciprocated her love, or at least I fancied 
I loved her. And I began to think seriously 
about marrying. 

But it was otherwise decided. My prudent, 
careful mother, got wind of it, and took upon 
herself the task of bringing me to reason. 
She began by pointing out the folly of such a 
step in a manner by no means calculated to 
exasperate, but none the less powerful. There 
was no ridicule in her words, but still she 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 59 

made me feel that the whole affair was per- 
fectly laughable. She did not seek to thwart 
my plans, but taught me gradually to regard 
them from another point of view. If I had 
ever really loved Anna> doubtless, I should 
not have given way. But the scales fell from 
my eyes : I did not love her : I only felt sorry 
for her. 

To this point my mother would constantly 
revert ; and then little by little began to divert 
my attention — not to speak of my desires — 
into another channel. 

She had taken a little child into the house, 
some distant, orphan relative. She was born 
in America, and was now about nine or ten 
years of age. Up to this time I had scarcely 
ever noticed her. But now passing allusions 
were constantly being made of her surpassing 
beauty; and at last she gave me plainly to 
understand " that in seven or eight years' time 
Lili would be one of the loveliest women, and 
one of the best matches in the world, and 
wouldj therefore, be sought after by hundreds. 
If I would only agree to dismiss Anna from 
my thoughts, and direct them towards Lili, 
she would not only promote my views, but 
would actually keep her for me. Of course, I 
should not marry her till she was grown up ; 
meanwhile I might travel the world round 



60 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

without being able to find a bride to compare 
with Lili." 

Yes! it was all true. My imaginative 
powers came into play, and from that day 
forth I occupied myself a great deal with the 
little fatherless Creole. 

Lili was, undoubtedly, a pretty child* I 
could form a very good opinion of what she 
would be, and my passions were accordingly 
aroused. Artless child that she was, she, of 
course, could not minister to them. But I 
derived a certain degree of enjoyment from 
her even now ; even before I was aware of it 
I was won over to my mother's scheme. 

There was something extremely exciting in 
these peculiar circumstances. To guard Lili 
for my very own, without her having the 
smallest idea of it herself; to watch her 
budding charms gradually developing them-* 
selves for me ; to mould her according to my 
wishes; to see treasure upon treasure accu- 
mulate within her, till the time of enjoying 
all these had come. Call it unnatural if you 
please, but it was enchantment to such a 
nature as mine. You understand me, selfish- 
ness is an ogre, that devours everything 
around it without becoming satisfied, or even 
one whit the fatter. But I was more than 
selfish. There was the demon of lust within ; 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 61 

and however natural in other respects demons 
may be, they always find their greatest de- 
light in acting contrary to nature. 

I gave my mother free liberty to arrange 
matters about Anna in a becoming manner ; 
and from that day I kept my promise, and 
never set eyes on her again. 

Was it not a great sacrifice on my part ? I 
feel it to have been so now ! 



62 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER V. 

I am beginning to feel myself at home — yes, 
at home! Sweetly and pleasantly as that 
word falls upon the ear above, in Hell it 
has a frightful sound. But Hell remains Hell 
whether we use the word home or not, and in 
Hell we must remain. The fact is we are com- 
pelled to feel ourselves at home. 

This irresistible impulse of vainly imitating 
what we did on earth ; of passing and of pur- 
suing a shadowy existence with an actual de- 
sire in the heart ; in this consists the " daily 
bread " of our torment in Hell, if I may use 
such a term. Yes ! desire is a full reality ; it 
is ever the same, though the bodily senses are 
dead. This it is that makes it so branded 
within, that it burns like a glowing flame. 
Our state here is not badly sketched in the 
fables of Tantalus and Sisyphus. In Hell 
nothing exists save desire alone, and every- 
thing is vain and fruitless. Truly is the 
saying exemplified here : " Vanity of vanities." 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 63 

All is illusion, and yet what a terrible 
reality ! 

I have accordingly resumed my former 
manner of life, not from pleasure, but from 
compulsion, with an inward feeling of loath- 
ing and disgust. Meanwhile I have got on 
very well in the circle in which for the time 
I am placed ; I have renewed many old ac- 
quaintances, besides forming several new 
ones, which I should not have cared to do 
when in the world. How astonished you 
would be if I were to be so indiscreet as to 
mention names. For not only are there 
several respectable persons to be found here, 
but they actually form the greater proportion, 
just as they did in the world. There is no 
mistaking them. I refer to those who think 
only of attending to their own affairs, and of 
eating their bread in peace and quiet, caring 
for naught else, utterly regardless of that 
higher calling which makes all the children 
of one Father, and unites them in one family. 

Only look around you. They throng about 
you, but pay no heed to you. They busy 
themselves, these men and women, in their 
public and private pursuits, in their domestic 
life, in their housekeeping and daily affairs. 
Few people have any idea that in the hubbub 
of daily life two of the most dangerous traps 



64 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

are laid for them. Some drag themselves 
through life ; others dawdle through it ; and 
this they call " to live." And then suddenly it 
is ended, and they close their eyes, to open 
them again in torment. 

Oh ! if I had but one year of my life over 
again (and I am not thinking of myself alone), 
possibly I might be the means of saving some 
of those respectable individuals, fathers of 
families, and others, from inevitable destruc- 
tion, whose thoughts never rise above their 
office desk, their dinner table, or their bed; 
and some of those exemplary housewives, too, 
and mothers of families whose ideas are con- 
centrated in their saucepans or washing tubs. 
I say, possibly, because I know too well that 
in most houses doors and hearts would be shut 
against me. 

Regarding the so-called benefactors of hu- 
manity, I have noticed one remarkable fact, 
that some of them (I say, some) have actually 
benefited hundreds of their fellow-beings, and 
have only been enemies to their own selves. 
But if you are wise, and would preserve your 
soul, beware of attaching any importance to 
the world's praise, of whatever nature it be. 
Like a worthless packet by express post, it 
will hurry you on to certain ruin. 

But I must recollect where I am. I have 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 65 

nothing more to do with the world. The mul- 
titudes I have alluded to above come into the 
torments of Hell without ever having been 
guilty of any gross crime. In the world it 
will be said (if only for the sake of the nice 
expression), " What a crying sin !" They felt 
themselves so secure, because they were un- 
conscious of having committed any crime; 
and in this consciousness they discovered the 
fulness of righteousness. And yet, for all 
that, they have gone to Hell ; though the 
greater number of them come here without 
any dominant passion within. " What a cry- 
ing sin !" But their misery is equally great. 
Their punishment, indeed, consists in their 
having nothing to do, no avocations, no busi- 
ness, in which they can employ themselves. 
But if they have no passions, they have habits. 
And is there not a saying, " Old habits bite 
best?" In other words, habits are just as 
biting as passions. It is quite certain that if 
restlessness and weariness could kill people, 
and it were possible to die here, the greater 
proportion of Hell's denizens would die from 
sheer ennui, and Hell would be deserted. 

After having been duly introduced, I live a 
very sociable life. You are astonished, per- 
haps, at my using the word " introduced," but 
without reason; for ought we to be quite 

VOL. i. F 



66 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

ignorant of good breeding and manners here ? 
There is no art in going to Hell ; but it is 
quite a different thing to be presentable in 
Hell. It is just the same as in the world, only 
with this difference : there, it depends on what 
a man is ; here, on what he has been. In the 
world I was a handsome, agreeable, refined 
man, of large means. I am not that now, but 
I pretend to be. Do not think therQ is any 
trick in this; it is pure nature — purer than 
any house of correction in the world could 
render it. 

At first, I was much bored with visits and 
invitations. Novelty is as much sought after 
here as in the world. If I had only brought 
with me a few of its silly, genteel fashions, I 
should have been heartily welcomed. But 
without wishing to say a word in my own 
praise, I brought nothing with me save a 
fashionable existence of a most vapid descrip- 
tion. Shall I give you an account of a luxu- 
rious and festive party I attended recently? 
They had shown me the honour of inviting 
me in company with some of the greatest 
gourmands and drinkers the world ever knew. 
Truly, an unmerited honour ! I have never 
been the one nor the other ; on the contrary, 
have always adhered to that golden rule, "Est 
modus in rebus" With a profusion almost un- 



I 

f LETTERS FROM HELL. 67 

precedented, there was everything to tantalize 
the appetite and tickle the palate. And to 
judge by the witty remarks and obscene jokes 
that were bandied about, it went off very well. 
There was everything to tempt; but enjoy- 
ment was wanting ! Prithee let me be silent on 
that score. Nothing was real at this banquet 
except inflamed passions ; the guests had no- 
thing else to consume save their own selves. 

Our meat and drink consisted of an inde- 
scribable feeling of nothingness; in every 
mouthful, in every glass we raised to our lips, 
we felt ourselves inwardly consumed. And 
as for the jokes, they were merely old, stale, 
musty sayings, hashed up again in a variety 
of ways, rather calculated to produce disgust 
than merriment. 

That person is not to be found in Hell who 
can give utterance to a really refreshing, 
amusing witticism. Meanwhile we were ob- 
liged to eat and drink, laugh and chat away as 
merrily as we could. 

We were obliged, do you understand ? If so, 
you have some idea what a banquet in Hell is. 

Or shall I go further, and describe one 
of our orgies to you ? I say our, but it is a 
rarity that I ever attend one of them. For 
they are more horrible in character than I can 
describe, and you know I lay great stress on 



68 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

decorum ; so on those grounds I will not enter 
into details, but will only remark that the pre- 
sence of the weaker sex by no means enhances 
one's enjoyment, but only increases the pain. 
Those empty kisses ! those shadowy embraces ! 
— Faugh ! let me pass them by in silence ! 

Whilst I was sitting at one of those sump- 
tuous boards where nothing that luxury could 
supply was wanting, I could not but reflect on 
the condition of the peasant, the poor half- 
starved peasant, who has to eat his bread in 
the sweat of his brow. Oh ! but that wretched 
crust with which he appeases his craving hun- 
ger, th^t weak thin beer with which he slakes 
his thirst, forms a banquet, indeed, to which 
ours bears no comparison. If only to have 
something real to bite with the teeth, some- 
thing real to swallow, whatever the drink may 
be — what a pleasure ! 

Is it not that incomparable hero Achilles, 
who, in the shades below, gives utterance to 
the remark, "that he would rather be the 
most miserable day-labourer on earth than a 
king or a hero without an equal in the lower 
world?" It is but heathenish wisdom, yet 
how true ! For my part, I would ten thousand 
times be the most abject slave ; be crushed -and 
bowed down by every sorrow, hard labour, 
and misery conceivable, than fill the highest 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 69 

post, or the most respectable position, in 
Hell. 

Of all the countless fools the world rears, 
none are greater than those who take away their 
own life, on the plea that it is impossible for 
them to be worse off than they are at present. 
Oh ! but however great their worldly suffer- 
ings may be, they can still be far more miser- 
able. They will long after the old condition, 
even though it had been the most wretched. 
Only offer them one ten times more wretched 
still, ten times more abject, and they would 
jump at it. If it were possible for you to do so, 
they would call you their saviour, and would 
eternally bless you. 

There are but few, however, who carry folly 
to such a pitch as to lay violent hands on 
themselves. The greater number (and their 
number is legion) content themselves with 
giving vent to sighs and groans, by wearing 
sour and miserable faces, and thus shorten 
their days. Their shortening their life 
would not matter much, if they only made it 
better. But unfortunately, they do the very 
reverse, they kill and waste the remainder of 
their days in ceaseless discontent. They are 
discontented with themselves ; with the world ; 
with the very air they breathe; the ground 
they walk on ; the light that falls on their eyes. 



70 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

And why are they dissatisfied ? Because for- 
sooth their health is not quite so good in some 
respects as could be desired ; because the 
world occasionally goes against them ; or be- 
cause their position in life does not quite har- 
monize with their views and tastes ; or because 
others are better off than themselves; or because 
they have had greater struggles to contend 
against than other people ; or because life has 
been a grand mistake, and their fondest hopes 
and aspirations have suffered shipwreck, 

I do not say that all this is nothing. On 
the contrary, life is full of hardships to most 
persons, to many it overflows with them. 
But this I do say. If you who are wasting 
away your time in discontent, could only look 
on matters from this place, you would find 
that however interwoven your earthly lot 
may be with sorrows, affliction, and misery, 
there is yet a bright side to it. So much 
depends on the way in which a person meets 
anything. If instead of staring till you are 
dazed at your misfortunes, disowning them 
as it were, you were to make them part and 
parcel of yourself, were to use them as a 
powerful incentive to action, how totally 
different your lot would appear to you. Many 
a misfortune is a misfortune only in imagi- 
nation ; under proper treatment it disperses. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 71 

And many an actual misfortune can often 
implant the germ of new aspirations, and thus 
lay the foundation of a better and a happier 
life. Yes, if you could only view things from 
this place, it would at once be evident to you 
that a man (an able man naturally) can bear 
a very great deal, can reconcile himself to 
many a misfortune, loss, and trouble, and still 
be a happy man. You would find that each 
day, even of such a life as that you are leading 
now, was a precious, a costly thing ; a gift 
from Heaven, for which it were impossible to 
be sufficiently grateful. You would under- 
stand how my soul longs to be in your place ; 
how fortunate I should prize myself, if I could 
only occupy the position of the most wretched 
being among you all. 

It is all clear to me now ; but 'tis too late ! 
too late ! 

That we worry ourselves with stiff and 
elegant parties, just as of old, is a natural 
consequence. Drawing-room life occupies no 
small portion of our existence. But if this 
description of " high life " used to be hollow, 
and killing work before, imagine what it is 
now, where hollowness and death are pre- 
supposed. When I reflect upon it, I cannot 
conceive how ever I could have made such a 
victim of myself to the world. It is exactly 



72 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

as if some evil, malicious spirit were at the 
bottom of it all. As if it dragged some 
twenty to fifty persons by the roots of the 
hair (who for the most part would have been 
very comfortable and happy at home — persons, 
who, generally speaking, do not even know one 
another), and shut them all up together in a 
brilliantly lighted suite of apartments. And 
that is called a party ! Doubtless, the spirit 
enjoys the fun immensely, but the poor 
victims are ready to die of ennui and weari- 
ness the while. At last when the spirit has 
amused himself enough for once, the enchant- 
ment is over. The company separates; the 
lights are put out! After the long and 
unnatural constraint, people cdine to their 
senses once again. Host and hostess say from 
their heart, "Thank God, it is all over!" 
While their guests ejaculate just as heartily, 
44 So glad to get home again !" 

I said just now, I could not conceive how 
ever I could have victimized myself for such 
formalities. But here it is quite a different 
matter. The constraint imposed on us here 
is far greater, ten times more terrible, than 
any spirit, however malicious, could impose. 

Well ! We go into society just as of old. 
Here, as there, the great aim is to show one- 
self; to act a part, and above all to bore one- 



LETTEKS FROM HELL. 73 

self to death by attention to etiquette. Here 
also, as there, it is our aim to wear a pleasing 
exterior, and to say pleasant things. And yet 
there is a great, a radical difference, which 
makes our position as painful as it is wonder- 
ful. For in Hell one sees not only through 
the external garb, but into the very soul. So 
when a person says with a smiling face, 
"How delighted I am to see you ! how very 
fortunate to meet you here !" and thinks at the 
same time, " Shall I quarrel with the old 
witch again ?" the party addressed reads all 
one's thoughts, as plainly as she hears the 
words. But we soon learn to arrive at a certain 
degree of nonchalance, or recklessness in such 
matters, otherwise all intercourse amongst us 
would be unbearable. At the moment I am 
talking, doubtless, the advantage is on the 
lady's side ; but directly she opens her mouth 
it is on mine ; for I can read her thoughts as 
plainly as she can mine. We are quits ! 

But there is one very disagreeable circum- 
stance connected with it ; it is a confounded 
obstacle to all flirtations. It would be an im- 
possibility to carry on an intrigue with a 
woman here, even if her virtue were rather 
frail. All the compliments of the world could 
not cozen her. Therefore, in one respect, we 
are a very virtuous set. Above all there is 



74 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

great difficulty in getting flattery and compli- 
ments to take. Our hearts are our deceivers, 
in a different sense though to what they were 
in the world. 

On the whole it is utterly impossible to form 
any idea of the number of surprising events 
that take place here each day. Viewed from 
this place the world appears as a land of 
dreams and imagination, but none the less 
lovely and desirable. Anomalous as it may 
seem, here where everything is unreal, reality 
for the first time appears naked and unvar- 
nished. Whether it be friends or enemies 
that meet, they quickly arrive at a mutual 
understanding, seldom, by the way, of a very 
agreeable nature. 

Would you like to hear an instance or two ? 
The following are culled from the most recent 
annals of gossip : 

A. had been shot in a duel in which he was 
engaged in order to wipe out an insult that 
had been offered to his young and devoted 
wife. To his great astonishment he met his 
late antagonist a few days ago, who had also 
gone the way of all flesh, and come to Hell. 

In a fit of exasperation he went up to him, 
but was met by the other with the utmost 
sang-froid- ' 

" Fool ! are you going to fly into another 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 75 

passion, and for nothing too ? Away with it 
— let us be friends ! " 

"For nothing!" hissed out A. "Was it 
nothing that you insulted my wife, and then 
took my life, when I stood forth to defend her ?" 

" I will tell you the truth," was the reply. 
"You take a wrong view of the matter 
entirely. It stands simply as follows : I was 
your wife's lover, but did not wish to be so 
any longer. That was the insult ! Then she 
set you on against me. I say again, away 
with it— let us be friends!" 

Whether they ever became friends I cannot 
say ; but I only know that this piece of infor- 
mation cooled A/s blood. 

* * * * 

Two cousins were sitting together in con- 
fidential conversation. They were Germans. 

" Yes ! I was born a poet ! " said one of 
them. "I wrote romances, and my first 
works made a tremendous sensation." 

" True ! Perhaps I know more about it 
than any one else," answered his cousin. " It 
was I who wrote the reviews in the papers 
and journals! It was I who brought you 
into notoriety, my dear Coz ! Such things 
are easily managed in our beloved fatherland, 
if one only has a few connections, and just 
enough wit so as to avoid being tedious." 



76 LETTERS FROM HELL, 

" What do you mean ?— you ? — I am sure I 
am extremely obliged to you. You must 
indeed have taken a deal of trouble." 

" Yes, indeed, I did," answered his cousin. 
" The trouble was exactly proportionate to the 
love I bore you. Have we not been like 
brothers ever since we were little children ? " 

Cousin number one thereupon became 
thoughtful. After a long pause he resumed : 

" Yes, indeed, I was uncommonly fortunate. 
I became really quite the rage, and saw bril- 
liant prospects before me. But all at once a 
change took place, which I never could ac- 
count for. The reviews suddenly became so 
bitter and cutting, that I could no longer find 
a publisher, and after several fruitless and 
abortive attempts was obliged to come down 
a peg or two." 

"I can explain that too, to your entire 
satisfaction," answered his companion. "I 
tore you to pieces in the paper ; I made you 
the object of a formal persecution; directly 
you gave utterance to a line, I was down 
upon you, so that at last you had to give it 
up." 

"How?— You?" 

" Yes ; it is quite true ! But of course I did 
it for the best. Your beloved mother, who had 
also been a mother to me, charged me with her 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 77 

last breath to do all in my power to arrest your 
future progress along the road to ruin, on which 
you had already set out. You had no poetical 
talents ; on the contrary, you were exactly cut 
out for a butter merchant, a business which 
had been in your family for generations, and 
which was a very lucrative one. I saw it at 
once ; it was all stuff about your literary fame. 
I had blown the bladder full, it is true, but I 
could not keep it inflated. In everything you 
wrote the wind kept escaping between the 
lines. Certainly you met your fate half way. 
Then I set to work. In the interest of poetic 
art, of butter dealing, and of your own, I 
summoned all my talents and sarcasm to crush 
you to the ground as often as you appeared in 
print J and my endeavours were crowned with 
the most signal success. Your family grew 
proud of you ; and you became a respectable 
butter merchant, burgher, and a patriot ! " 

" And am in Hell," interrupted the unfortu- 
nate poet, rather peevishly ; " but should I 
ever have come here had the road to Parnassus 
not been so shamefully blocked against me ?" 

"Well, that is a question, certainly," an- 
swered his cousin quietly. " But of this I am 
quite convinced, that poetry was as little 
likely to gain you admission into Paradise, 
as that butter is. the cause of your being in 



78 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Hell. But come, are we not like brothers? 
I meant it all for the best. What I did, I 
would not have done for any one else." 

But the poetical butter dealer turned angrily 
away ; he had heard more than he could digest 

all at once. 

♦ * * * 

€i Nay, what, you here, my dear fellow ?" ex- 
claimed a fat, pudgy little man, embracing a 
conspicuous-looking fop who had advanced to 
meet him. " I am glad and yet grieved to see 
you here. You were the only one who stood 
by me in my trouble. When I had lost every- 
thing all my friends deserted me; but you, 
you alone stuck to me." 

" Not everything, my dear friend," was the 
mild answer. " You are making too much of 
it — not everything. You had your wife left 

you still." 

♦ * * * 

Two monks were sitting together engaged 
in earnest conversation. 

" But tell me," said the one, " tell me, dear 
brother, how it was that you came to go into a 
cloister?" 

" The answer is very simple, — through my 
own stupid folly. I fell desperately in love 
with Lisella Neri, of our town; you may 
perhaps remember her. She was reputed to 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 79 

be a great beauty, and an excellent match ; 
but as I could not get her, and in fact no one 
else, I got disgusted with life, and entered 
a cloister ; and I have repented it ever since. 
That is my simple tale. But what made you 
go into a cloister ?" 

" A very different reason to yours," was the 
reply. " I, too, had a hankering after Lisella, 
was accepted, and became the unhappiest hus- 
band under the sun. Lisella was the most 
capricious and ill-tempered little vixen in the 
world, and she did not care a pin for me. I 
never had a moment's peace. So at last I 
jumped at the only loop-hole open to me. I 
left her all I possessed, and entered a cloister, 
and have never repented doing so ; for if ever 
I did feel at all discontented with my lot, I 
had only to think of Lisella, and my ill- 
humour vanished at once." 

After this piece of information the first 
monk remained a little while buried in deep 
thought. 

"Well, I can make nothing out of it," at 
length he said, " except that no man can avoid 
his destiny. As far as I can see, I should 
have entered a cloister whatever had hap- 
pened. But you, brother, became the happier 
of the two — not by Lisella, the pretty witch, — 
but by the sad experience she taught you." 



80 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

But enough of this. I wonder how I can 
tell such tales. If you think it affords me any 
pleasure to do so, you are very much mistaken. 
Amusement in Hell is always connected with 
the bitterest pain. 

Martin, poor Martin, what has become of 
thee? Truly he suffered a great wrong. 
Badly brought up, badly managed, he was my 
work. 

She was a pretty little girl, just about his 
age. I made her acquaintance as she was 
scouring a staircase. Menial though her oc- 
cupation was, she still presented a most attrac- 
tive spectacle to the eye of a connoisseur. I 
question whether she could possibly have ap- 
peared to greater advantage under any cir- 
cumstances whatsoever. The exertion which 
set her young blood and limbs in motion ; her 
negligee style of dress and manner; on the 
whole the entire absence of restraint about 
her, set her off wonderfully. I snatched her 
away from the humiliating position, to which 
her nature was little adapted, and placed her 
in a respectable family, where she could be 
properly clothed and educated. 

Naive and simple though she was, she 
seemed to understand that I did not do all 
this for nothing. But she was still rather too 
unpolished for me, and I knew how to wait. 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 81 

How ever Martin and she got acquainted I 
cannot make out ; but the first sight seems to 
have decided it. Simultaneously, as if by an 
electric spark, the flame was kindled in both 
their hearts, and a mutual understanding was 
the speedy result. 

Martin openly acknowledged his attachment 
to me. I ought to have regarded it, but I did 
not. Stung to the quick, I hated him fiercely for 
what he had done. Then he left me in anger. 
Just as determined as I should have been, he 
never reflected for a moment on the results, 
but carried off the girl under my very eyes. 

She was not to be found anywhere ; but he 
did not hide himself, but defiantly presented 
himself before me. Then I drove him from 
my house, and as I thought from my heart. 
But I was deceived ; no, not from my heart. 

What could he have had to communicate 
that would smooth matters between us ? Did 
it refer to himself or to her ? 

" A higher power had judged between us !" 

These enigmas are enough to drive one 
wild. 

Many riddles, but only one question ; and 
this one burns like a brand into my soul, and 
gives me insufferable agony. Possibly it may 
cause my ghost to revisit the earth. 

But would my question be answered then ? 

VOL. I. G 



82 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Let me give you a description of Lili. But 
I foresee that my description of her as a child 
cannot quite exclude my description of her 
a woman. And I must add that I see her now 
before me as she was at a far later date. Then 
I did not see her, did not know her, though I 
anatomized her with my eyes. But it was a 
mere carnal look then ! What so blind as 
passion ? 

She was a Creole. Her features were delicate, 
finely traced, though not classically regular ; 
her soft hair was of a lustrous black ; her eyes, 
like twin stars, of so deep a blue that they 
appeared almost to be black, veiled over by 
long silken eyelashes in the most fascinating 
manner. Her figure was light, graceful, per- 
fectly symmetrical, and well filled out, while 
her hands and feet were of the most exquisite 
shape. Such, in short, was Lili. Perhaps 
her eyes were the loveliest feature she pos- 
sessed. Ah, they gaze into my very soul even 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 83 

now ! Never, to all eternity, shall I forget 
the melting glances of her bright eyes, half 
tears, half smiles ; despondent, and yet so full 
of promise ! They never failed to touch my 
heart. 

A Creole girl is generally thought to be 
passionate, wayward, and capricious. Nothing, 
however, was further from Lili's nature than 
either of these qualities. It is true she was 
of an ardent temperament ; but it possessed a 
glow so mild, so fervent ; not issuing forth in 
passionate outbursts, but rather dissolving 
itself within in genial warmth. Where the 
right, or truthfulness, or love demanded it of 
her, her will was firm as a rock. In all else 
she was docility itself. Utterly unselfish 
herself, affection was the lawj the necessity 
of her being. Poor child ! No greater mis- 
fortune could have befallen her than to meet 
with one, who was made up of pure selfishness 
and of naught else. 

She was, as it were, all heart. At a more 
mature age a physician pronounced the orga- 
nization of her heart to be defective; some 
said it was too large. And I can well believe 
it, for I never knew a heart so easily moved 
as hers. Affection was the sole thing she 
longed after. It often needed but one kind 
word, aye, or even one kind look, to make her 



84 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

fall on my neck, and nestle to my bosom. Her 
heart would burn within her at almost any- 
thing. The trials and sufferings of mankind, 
their fortunes and misfortunes, their joys and 
sorrows, she made the one object of her study. 
Sympathy was her life and breath. 

I could not but think sometimes that she 
was not made to live in the world. 

It will, therefore, be readily understood that 
a girl with a nature such as hers would often 
feel herself repulsed and wounded in her in- 
tercourse with her fellows, would feel like a 
stranger among them. 

On that account she kept mostly by herself, 
or with me, wretched being that I am. Hence 
it was that her nature was simple to a degree, 
but not of that stamp that marks the fool, 
but which is rather the characteristic of 
true genius. I am convinced that if she 
had ever become old and grey-headed, she 
would have retained the child within her. 
Nothing was easier than to make her be- 
lieve anything, provided it did not offend 
her fine moral sense. It never occurred to 
her that anybody could impose upon her. 
Once or twice I did so, but never more. I 
bitterly repented it. Shameless _ impudence 
would even have stepped aside for her holy- 
innocence. She was one of those choice 



• LETTERS FROM HELL. 85 

natures to which the scum of the world seemed 
as if it could not adhere. I dare almost say 
that she could have passed through the lowest 
depths of sin and infamy without receiving 
the least taint. It never occurred to her 
to believe evil of any one. Her eyes were 
never opened to the truth that it was an evil 
world in which we live. Sin she knew to 
exist; in her childish nature she had the 
deepest consciousness of its existence. But 
as to vice, she never knew anything of it as 
long as her foot trod the earth. 

I should be doing myself injustice if I were 
to say I felt all this now for the first time. 
No. I felt it then, bad as I was. But I must 
again sigh, "What a match, she and I !" It was 
sheer spirit against the flesh. Poor Lili ! 

Of knowledge she possessed but little, if 
the number of subjects be taken into account. 
History was her favourite study, for it told her 
about human beings ; their toils and labours, 
their fortunes and sorrows ; otherwise it was a 
dead language to her. In mechanical accom- 
plishments she was therefore deficient ; indeed, 
it was a fruitless task to try and teach her 
even a foreign language. Naturally, there- 
fore, where her feelings had so much play, she 
became thoughtful and dreamy, though we 
did our best to drive it out of her. But it 



86 LETTEKS FROM HELL. * 

is always a thankless task to work against 
nature. She was not reserved though ; for to 
me at least she confided the inmost thoughts 
of her soul. 

The sacred narrative, of all others, was her 
favourite study. From it her spirit drew its 
first nourishment; and the impression she 
received was deep indeed. 

u God who loved lost creatures to death, even 
the death of the cross." Nothing ever moved 
her at a later period so much as this affection 
and this suffering. Over and over again she 
would read it ; an angel must have counted the 
tears she shed over its pages. Though unlike 
the Magdalene, in all else she resembled her 
in her burning love towards the Crucified One. 

At a later period the history of the Crusades 
formed an epoch in her life. The Crucified 
was her first love, the Crusades her first enthu- 
siasm. In a few weeks she seemed to have 
become years older, so powerfully had the idea 
possessed her. Henceforth the Holy Land, 
where God's Son had lived and suffered, be- 
came the darling object of her aspirations. 
On one or two occasions she betrayed her 
thoughts, to her lasting sorrow ; for her young 
friends nicknamed her " The Crusader," and 
whenever they met her, even though they did 
not speak a word, they would cross their fingers 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 87 

significantly at her. It was a terrible and 
expressive pantomime ! 

Thus, in a measure, the Saviour's cross had 
become her cross. She was deeply wounded 
at their coarse jests, and from that time never 
once alluded to the Holy Land. But, doubt- 
less, her heart thought the more about it, 
though her lips were silent. I say perhaps, 
for circumstances at a later period made me 
suspect that such was the case, though I could 
not be quite certain. 

Is it not true, then, that she did not seem to 
be formed for the world, at least not for my 
world ? 

If I had not been the wretch I was, a mere 
glance at her would have confirmed my 
opinion. Lovely, pure as an angel ; though 
all her loveliness was as nothing when com- 
pared with the beauty of her mind. During 
my whole life beauty and pleasure were the 
only things that had any attraction for me. 
But never have I known anything more 
ravishing than the perfect attachment of that 
childlike heart, in which no drop of impure 
blood, no grain of falsehood, no shadow of 
selfishness, harboured. Never have I expe- 
rienced anything so captivating as her angelic 
tenderness, so devoid of cloud, so free from re- 
serve, so forgetful of self, so unassuming, that 



88 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

regarded itself as poor and mean, and yet 
acted as if it had a thousand lives and a 
thousand blessings to bestow. 

It was impossible to be quite uninfluenced 
by the hallowed powers that dwelt within her ; 
at times indeed, especially when she could no 
longer be looked on as a child, the influence 
they exerted on me was very powerful. But, 
and I must confess it, I regarded her from the 
very first with unhallowed looks. I had 
hurriedly entered into my mother's plans, and 
not only did I watch over the pretty child, but 
I literally brooded over her. Already I re- 
garded her as mine, and calculated in advance 
what she would bring me in in the course of 
time. She was not difficult to win, and I won 
her completely. Whenever I wished, she would 
lie in my arms, stretch out her little cheek to be 
kissed, and leave her sweet tiny hand in mine. 

Thus a couple of years fled away, when my 
mother deemed it prudent to interpose. 

" It will not do," she said, " you are enjoy- 
ing your future in advance, and will ruin it. 
She will become developed far too early, if 
things go on thus. You must be separated for 
a time. Travel ; remain away for a few years. 
Meanwhile I will educate Lili for your happi- 
ness and joy. Travel, my son ; some day you 
will thank me for this advice." 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 89 

I felt she was right, that it was absolutely 
necessary ; and I constrained myself to follow 
her advice, in the interests of prudence, or 
rather of a gross passion. A short time pre- 
viously it had been decided on sending one of 
the partners abroad ; and as my uncle, who 
was head of the firm, could not go, and as my 
cousin, who was second partner, had a great 
disinclination to leave home at that time, I 
announced my readiness to travel, at my 
mother's urgent request. And I set out. 
They had to tear the weeping girl from my 
embrace. But, though much moved myself, I 
consoled myself with the thought, " we shall 
meet again, my little bride, and then I shall 
have gained more than you have lost now." 

My sojourn abroad lasted longer than I had 
anticipated, but at length the time came when 
I could return. During my absence I had re- 
ceived frequent letters from home, and from 
Lili too. 

Wonderful letters! They seemed as if 
they were penned by an angel's hand. And, 
^although these ethereal communications — 
let me style them — were somewhat strange 
and foreign to my nature, still they made a 
deep impression on me. I felt an indescri- 
bable, though I fear not a holy delight at 
being able to say, "This blessed, innocent 



90 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

child is mine ; and it is I who will make her 
some day feel that she too is flesh and blood, 
a child of the world," 

At last I returned home, and saw her once 
more. Oh ! enchantment ! My expectations 
were more than surpassed. There she stood 
before me, graceful and slender in figure, in- 
comparably lovely, with a soft blush diffused 
over her cheeks, her eyes modestly cast down- 
wards, and her young bosom gently heaving 
with emotion. She was just then on the thres- 
hold of womanhood, scarce yet fifteen years 
old. The instant I pronounced her name, she 
raised her eyes to mine, and fixed on me a 
gaze so beaming over with happy love, that it 
went to my heart. It was but one look, yet 
it told volumes. The next moment she was 
clasped to my bosom. 

Shall I call it a happy period that now 
ensued? If it was, neither was it without 
pain. When I saw Lili before me, it was just 
as if I were reading her letters again, and yet 
the feeling of enjoyment was far, far greater. 
Still there was no gratification in it, as I began* 
to feel each day of my intercourse with her. 
Her aspirations were as widely remote from 
mine as heaven is from earth ; and I felt this 
to be the case even when I embraced her in 
my arms and called her my own. The same 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 91 

child as before, but more developed; affec- 
tionate as ever, and yet this very affectionate- 
ness caused me anguish ; for, what was truth 
and reality to her, to me was mere vanity. 
Her love and mine, therefore, were two very 
different things. 

Thus we continued to live together for a 
while, when my prudent mother again inter- 
fered : 

"She must have time and opportunity 
given her for development, otherwise her fine 
and delicate nature would be injuriously 
forced. Moreover, from living in such close 
and daily intercourse with her, she would 
learn to regard me as a brother, and that was 
surely not my wish. I had better live apart, 
and not be too prodigal of my visits. At the 
same time there was no reason why I should 
not make myself as agreeable and necessary 
to her as I pleased. But I must promise her 
that I would not breathe a word about love 
till she had completed her seventeenth year." 

On this point my mother was determined, 
so I gave her my word, and moved into lodg- 
ings. On the whole, I perceived that it was 
to my advantage, and felt satisfied with the 
change. Lili was very backward, and my 
presence evidently did not conduce to her pro- 
gress. As for myself it was as if I could get 



92 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

a better view, of her now, and I found her 
twice as lovely as ever. I noticed also that 
her manner towards me began to be different. 
No longer a child, she would blush up to her 
eyes whenever she saw me ; and I had, there- 
fore, to be very careful in my intercourse with 
her, and the precaution proved of real benefit 
to me, though not the less a trial, and that a 
severe one, notwithstanding that it was rich 
in blessings. 

I made inquiries about Anna. Her father 
had long since been dead, and nobody knew 
what had become of her. Yery likely my 
mother knew, but I could never bring myself 
to question her; so I cast the recollection 
away from me, and Lili's presence uncon- 
sciously helped me to do so. 

But soon I had other things to harass me. 

Lili was evidently drooping. She had just 
arrived at that critical time when the woman 
in her rebelled against the childish nature, 
and was making every exertion to usurp its 
place. But her constitution was too weak and 
frail for the struggle. So it was arranged that 
we should spend the winter in the south for 
the benefit of her health, and for my diversion. 

Lili had grown very thoughtful, and often 
indulged in reveries. It was not unnatural ; 
and never had she appeared so charming than 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 93 

when endeavouring to solve the great enigma 
of life. But, when taken in connection with 
other circumstances, this was considered to be 
rather an alarming symptom. 

■' Her system required to be gently, and yet 
fully re-invigorated," such was the advice the 
physicians gave. 

So we set out, early in the autumn, mother, 
Lili and I. 

And here the bright period of my life 
may be said to have begun, with only 
just enough of darkness in it as is necessary 
to the existence of shade. Lili's state dis- 
turbed me but little ; passion caused me but a 
transitory pain. A period of about a year 
passed, I will not say quite free from spot or 
blemish, but without my having anything to 
reproach myself for; in short, it was Elysium ! 
And now ... I am in Hell ! 

We were so happy together! My mother 
naturally was amiability itself. I, at least, 
was on my good behaviour, while Lili literally 
revelled in the freedom of her manner of life, 
which brought with it so many and such varied 
enjoyments. With increasing confidence she 
would now hold up her lovely head, would 
cast her beaming gaze over the beauties of the 
world with greater freedom; physically and 
mentally her beauty developed itself in a 



94 LETTERS FROM HELL, 

marvellous manner. One single half-year had 
produced a great change in her. Womanhood 
had budded forth in the first radiance of youth, 
fresh and pure as a rose, bejewelled with the 
early dews of morning. And, at the same 
time, a change had taken place in her manner 
towards me. Though tender and affectionate 
as ever, there was a maidenly reserve about 
her. No longer the little one who had hitherto 
lived in that which was external to herself, 
she now found a life within, immeasurably 
rich and lovely. We approached each other 
more on equal terms. 

Equal, did I say ? Yet she far surpassed me 
in the rich endowments of heart and soul.. In 
a very short time, she gained a wonderful power 
and influence over me. Gladly I submitted to 
the yoke ; there was a pleasure in it more enno- 
bling, more delightful, than anything I had 
ever felt. She raised me, as it were, above 
myself without my knowledge. New feelings, 
new interests and pursuits, were beginning to 
bud within me, and it dawned upon me with 
an ever-increasing clearness that there was 
something in the world of greater worth and 
nobility than selfish love and selfish pleasures. 
Day hy day my nature became ennobled and 
purified from contact with hers. I was on 
the road to become a good, pious, and loveable 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 96 

man, or rather, let me say in one word, a 
man. 

Her eyes had opened themselves wide to 
the beauty of the world, a beauty of a very 
different nature to that which I had ever 
known; and, by degrees, I, too, came to see 
with them. But her gaze and her aspirations 
were directed upwards. - Earth could not rivet 
them. It was as if she saw Heaven opened 
above her ; and, can you believe it, she took 
me with her in her heavenly flight, heavily 
laden though I was in the flesh? What power, 
what might, in a being so frail and delicate ! 
But it cost her no exertion. She drew me 
with her : in her I forgot aught else. I listened 
to the words that fell from her lips as atten- 
tively as if she had been some prophetess 
predicting for me countless blessings, and was 
transported away from earth. An entirely 
new world, a spiritual world, opened itself to 
my enraptured gaze; even life eternal, that 
consummation of bliss, began to dawn upon me. 
How many ennobling hours can I recall, that I 
passed with her. 

My God ! what recollections ! and oh ! what 
torture ! 

I began to be actually ashamed of myself 
when I reflected on what I had been. That 
loye which I had felt so long for Lili — love, in- 



96 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

deed it was ! but what a love ! It would have 
terrified her had she had the least inkling of 
it. But she never got to know it. True, 
there were moments when the old ravening 
nature made itself felt within; when dizzy 
with passion, I was well-nigh losing my self- 
control. At such times I would madly press 
her to my bosom, and embrace her with the 
glowing ardour of passion; or else cast my- 
self down before her, clasp her knees, or kiss 
her feet while the hot, burning tears rained 
down upon them. Then she would be terrified 
at my violence, and would press her hand upon 
her heart, as if her spirit were passing away. 
But she did not understand it; the meaning of 
it all was far remote from her chaste mind. 
In her innocence, she only felt the sincerest 
compassion for me, only thought to soothe me. 
She would call me by the most endearing 
names, would let her tears flow with mine — 
two streams, forsooth, of a widely different 
nature — the one turbid and muddy, the other 
bright and pure as crystal. And the power 
of her innocence never failed to recall me to 
my senses. The promise I had made my 
mother flashed again across my mind, and, 
though it cost me much, I still found strength 
in the thought that soon, very soon, the temp- 
tation would be over. And then, when the 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 97 

paroxysm was passed, the same happy blessed 
days returned. 

I think I have now explained the relations 
that existed between us. There was a wild 
beast within, but she had tamed it. 

It was spring once more, and we were be- 
ginning to think of retracing our steps home- 
wards. Lili had on one or two occasions suffered 
from rather alarming symptoms, which the 
physicians — half charlatans — of that country 
called " oppression of the heart." At that time 
we were on one of the Ionian Isles. But we 
would not allow it to disturb us ; for Lili had 
of late grown stronger, and had become more 
lovely than ever, as she now stood forth in 
the full bloom of youth. We were too happy 
in her, too secure in our joy. 

But as we began to talk of bending our steps 
homewards, a strange restlessness took posses- 
sion of her. I sought, of course, to learn the 
cause, and found to my surprise that there 
was a yearning desire of her heart yet un- 
satisfied, of older date and of a different cha- 
racter to mine. Suddenly the whim of her 
childhood — a visit to the Holy Land — had re- 
turned. Or had it ever left her ? Had it not 
only been lulled to sleep for a little while ? 
Probably so. She begged, she entreated me 
not to return till I had let her see the Holy 

VOL. i. H 



98 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Land, however short and hasty our visit might 
he. " Unless she did this, she would never have 
a moment's peace ; but only let her get there 
through my help, and she would eternally 
bless me." 

I could not but regard it as a fanciful idea, 
though, at the same time, it was impossible to 
help admiring the steadfastness with which 
she had clung to it from her very childhood. 
Aye ! not only did I admire it, but I felt my- 
self so moved that I determined to use all my 
influence in order to promote her wishes. Had 
she even asked for anything still more unrea- 
sonable, I could not have withstood her en- 
treaties; for it seemed as if her very life lay in 
my hands when she besought me so earnestly. 

I spoke to my mother about it. She reluc- 
tantly gave her consent, and this last little 
trip was decided upon. It would only occupy 
a few weeks, we thought, and so we set out. 
That lobk with which she thanked me, that 
soft, angelic look, brimming over with love, 
still burns in my heart, and will burn there 
till the judgment day. Thenceforth a hea- 
venly peace was diffused over her whole being. 
Her restlessness was gone now, for her joy 
was complete. 

But a few words more, and my narrative 
is ended. Why should I pain myself by 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 99 

telling more? it is greater than I can bear 
already. 

We had set foot on the Holy Land. I made 
Lili enter it as a princess, while I was but 
her chief servant. But she had no princely 
thoughts about her ; she entered it as a lowly 
pilgrim. We spent some weeks in running 
about from place to place. Lili was suffering 
more than we suspected; but she could not 
rest. Her malady was a dangerous heart 
disease, and already serious symptoms were 
showing themselves. How blind we had 
been ! I say we, for perhaps it had not escaped 
my mother's quick eye. 

An unlucky combination of circumstances 
caused it to break out in a sudden and alarm- 
ing manner. In a cloister at Bethlehem, where 
we had to crave admittance, she breathed her 
last, a few days only before she would have 
completed her seventeenth year. She had 
passed away with an angel's hallowed smile 
upon her lips ; the goal of her life was reached. 
Her earthly career had been but a pilgrimage 
to the Holy Land. 

In her, death had lost all its terrors. She lay 
as one transfigured ; pale and more lovely in a 
higher sense than a worldly one, with her hands 
folded meekly over her breast ; a breast where- 
in the world had never found a resting-place. 



100 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

You will scarcely believe it when I tell you 
that even in her last hours, when I saw for a 
certainty that she was lost to me, she raised 
me up with her far above the level of perish- 
able things. And I felt myself so comforted, 
as if this earthly life were a» thing of naught, 
as if I should ere long meet her in a better 
place, where sorrow, tears, and suffering are 
no inore, and where death and partings are 
unknown. 

Oh ! what a conception ! 

Her last words — and they sounded so soft, so 
spiritual, just as if they came from another 
world — were thanks and blessings : 

" Thanks, Otto ! I am so happy. , . God 
bless you. . ." 

I was very nearly losing my composure 
through my emotion ; but I had an inward 
feeling that in a little while I could have con- 
quered all pains. 

In one hallowed kiss I received her last 
breath. 

But scarcely was the breath gone out of her 
than I came to myself again, and the old 
brutal nature re-appeared once more. I had 
but one thought, " What had I lost in her ! 
what a treasure of beauty and grace ! what a 
consummation of enjoyment ! And so close to 
my happiness, too ; but a few days more and 



LETTERS FROM HELL* 101 

she had been mine." I raged like a wild beast 
whose prey has been snatched away from it. 
She had escaped me ! 

This, then, was the fruits of my self-denial 
for years and years ; of the many sacrifices I 
had made ; of the forbearance I had shown. 
In her I had year by year treasured up my 
all, and had lost it in a single moment* 

And yet was it not better that she should 
have escaped the miserable fate she would 
have met with in my arms ? 

Lili, Lili! ... I think I could even 
rejoice at it ... if I were not in Hell ! 

My mother mourned also, but never lost her 
composure ; it was mostly for my sake she 
grieved. So we returned home, after having 
buried Lili in the Holy Land. 

She rests beneath a sycamore, not far from 
the place where her Saviour was born. 

It was on our return home from this jour- 
ney that I met with and adopted the boy 
Martin. Sad remembrance ! 

So I became the man I was to remain. I 
gave myself up to the world ; lived only for 
my own enjoyment ; loved only myself, with 
the exception, perhaps, of my mother and my 
adopted son. I say, perhaps ; for I dare not 
positively assert that I really did love them. 
I was called a Christian, but was not one. 



102 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

True, I was not of the number of those who 
make a mock at holy things, for after Lili's 
death nothing was longer holy to me. Now 
and then childish thoughts from bygone days 
tried to assert their influence, but I was afraid 
of them, and thrust them hastily aside each 
time. In a word, I believed in what is 
termed Christianity only just so far as it suited 
my views, and my faith gradually dwindled 
away. 

My mother began to look old ; but increas- 
ing years seemed to have no influence over 
her. She continued to be beautiful, always 
the perfect lady, ever an object of universal 
admiration. Always of a pious disposition, 
she now became very religious, and sought to 
make me so too. But her powers did not 
extend so far as that* She could not get me 
to do more than observe Christian rites and 
ceremonies. For my own sake I maintained 
a decorous manner in all my dissipations. 

And now I have done! It has cost me 
much to complete these confessions. Do not 
think it gives me any satisfaction to do so ; 
still it seems to have lightened a heavy burden, 
and that is always something. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 103 



CHAPTER VII. 

The light waxes slowly stronger. The high- 
est point it ever reaches is but a clear twilight ; 
and then the splendour of Paradise is at hand, 
though still far distant. Time passes as it 
may, in sorrow, regret, and suffering. You 
must not think that because I am able to 
interest you, I can in any way interest my- 
self. Alas! it is only a delusion, as every- 
thing else here in Hell is. Time passes on, 
true enough ; but brings no relief with it. In 
the world there was always this consolation, 
* there will be an end to it ;" but here — and 
that is the terrible thing — here there never 
will be an end. Among the minor things on 
which I used to set great store was to gain 
admission as a bachelor to ladies' tea and coffee 
parties. There was something unusually at- 
tractive to me in the slander and gossip that 
was bandied to and fro at them. Of course 
on such occasions I used to look as innocent 
as possible for fear of spoiling the fun. 



104 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

I still feel the same interest, still follow it up. 

Of course there is pain attached to it; 
everything is painful in Hell. 

Well, tea and coffee parties, slander of course 
included, abound here. In the world we used 
to denominate anything that was very weak 
and diluted as " tea wash." But the weakest 
" tea wash " in the world is a strong drink 
compared with the tea and coffee poured out 
at these parties. Neither has slander lost 
anything by its long passage here; on the 
contrary, the tongue knows no restraint. 

Propriety and decorum too are totally disre- 
garded. Nothing too bad, too shameful, too 
secret, but it is dragged forth by these sisters of 
slander when once they have warmed to the 
work. They seem inspired ; the one surpass- 
ing the other in venomous fabrication and 
scandal. But there is one remarkable circum- 
stance, that when once these good ladies have 
done their best at backbiting others, they 
begin involuntarily to speak against them- 
selves. It is no use striving against it ; they 
are compelled to unfold the secrets of their 
oWn lives, however private, however disgrace- 
ful they may be. To see how the other dear 
creatures enjoy it ; how they wink at one 
another, bite their lips, and nearly go out of 
their senses for joy. But their enjoyment 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 105 

lasts only up to a certain point ; that is, till it 
comes to their turn to speak ; then they, too, 
against their will, give the others a full and 
ample revenge. 

I have just come from one of these parties, 
and feel in the humour to give you one or two 
characteristic anecdotes. 

The lady who was talking, though young no 
longer, had very pretty features. Perhaps 
a taste not so nice as mine would have pro- 
nounced her beautiful. The experiences of 
life often leave behind a very lovely impress 
on the faces both of men and women ; but 
with the greater number, especially with 
women, it assumes an expression of bold im- 
pudence which is never pleasing. The speaker 
was one of this description. 

" Really, my dear friends," she began, in an 
affected voice, " we ought not to speak ill of 
our neighbours. I believe there is a command- 
ment expressly forbidding it. But as you have 
asked me about that strange couple that just 
passed, something, by the way, like a bulldog 
mated with a crane, I will tell you in a few 
words what I know about them. 

"The man, then, was one of the most 
devoted Fhombre players in the world. . Even 
on his death-bed he would insist on having 
his game of Fhombre. 



106 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

"'Pass!* he ejaculated, and drew his last 
breath. Whether the points were ever Bettled 
I cannot say; but this I do know, that his 
widow was so deeply moved at it, that she gave 
the servant a sound box on the ear, because 
she did not walk softly enough to please her. 
Evil tongues very likely said that she was so 
afraid lest her poor dear man might waken up 
again. 

" But there was no fear of that ; he was really 
dead, and remained dead and was buried. 
On his tombstone was placed the following 
simple but expressive epitaph : 

"<J. J. P. 

" i HE SHUFFLED THROUGH LIFE !' 

" I shall never forget the day of the funeral. 
We were at our country seat, a few miles from 
town. 

"'Dear A ,' I said to my husband, 

'don't you think you ought to follow poor 
P to the grave V 

" After a few growls he allowed that, per- 
haps, he ought to do so. So it was arranged 
that he should go to town the next morning. 

" Now, I knew very well, whenever my hus- 
band went to town, he never returned home 
till the following morning. It was a little 
diversion for him. I suppose he went to his 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 107 

club ; and I am sure I never found any fault 
with him for it. Husbands are not now what 
they should be. 

" Well, I got the dear fellow to take a note 
for me, and made him promise to deliver it 
directly he got into town. I had a friend 
living there, I should tell you, who, by the 
way, was no friend of my husband's. He 
was a distant cousin of mine, but my hus- 
band, oddly enough, disapproved of his visits 
to our house. A very grievous fault in him ! 
But my cousin liked it, and I liked it, and so 
it was rather difficult to prevent our meeting 
whenever an opportunity occurred. Whether 
it is part of a cousin's duty, I cannot say, but, 
anyhow, he took upon himself the office of 
teaching me how to love. So neglected, in- 
deed, had my education been in this respect, 
that even in my nineteenth year I did not 
actually know what love meant. My husband 
could not teach me ; he was too old and awk- 
ward. But with my cousin it was a very 
different matter. But let me hasten to assure 
you, on my honour, that our relations with 
each other were of the most innocent and 
harmless nature conceivable; we had scarce 
passed the introductory stage. 

" Well, my husband set out with the letter 
to my lady friend, who, of course, was none 



108 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

other but this cousin. I thought it such a 
capital joke that he, dear man, should be the 
bearer of the letter. Enough, then, when I 
tell you that my husband spent the evening 
at his club ; and that I was not alone ! Next 
morning, when he returned home, the house 
looked just as usual. 

" ' Anything occurred during my absence ? 
he inquired as usual. 

" It was all I could do to keep from laughing. 

" ' No, love ! there was not a soul here the 
whole day!'" 

Hell is naturally full of loose characters ; 
both of those who openly ply their trade, and 
those who are outwardly respectable indivi- 
duals. The first-named class swarm on the 
outskirts of inhabited places, where they follow 
their old pursuits. But the latter occupy their 
places in society, in order to cater for scandal, 
a matter of the last importance in Hell. I 
mean thereby that they not only may thus 
be able to recount their own scandalous 
histories, but constantly be giving rise to 
new ones of the most varied and attractive- 
character. 

Who does not recall the history of Mars 
and Venus in Vulcan's net ? It is acted over 
and over again every day. But the shame 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 109 

which these women made light of before, now 
becomes their constant torment. For modesty 
and respectability are now the sole objects of 
their ambition. But all in vain ! They are 
a defenceless prey to vice under its numerous 
and indefinite forms. 

I do not intend to moralize — it would not 
do in Hell ; but I must draw your attention 
for a moment to the essential difference that 
exists between these two classes of women. 
And it does not at all redound to the credit of 
those who in the world escaped the oppro- 
brious epithet, and the disgrace attached to it. 
Want and wretchedness for the most part 
made the others what they are; they fell 
victims to a hard and cruel necessity. The 
first but followed the bent of their inclinations. 
There was nothing to compel them to follow 
their calling ; on the contrary, everything to 
render it expedient for them to remain virtu- 
ous. It is, therefore, a natural consequence 
that they are under far worse conditions in 
Hell than the others. 

The above tale drew forth universal ap- 
plause from the company ; everybody began to 
whisper and titter, while a diabolical expression 
of joy gleamed forth from all eyes. All but the 
narrator herself were in excellent spirits ; for 
no sooner had she finished her tale than she be- 



110 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

came fully aware that she had made a great fool 
of herself. She was nearly dying from chagrin . 

But in order to fill up the uncomfortable pause 
that ensued, she asked her next neighbour : 

" Have you ever been in Naples, my dear ? 
and did you know the Princess Z ?" 

" Oh, yes ! I had that honour," was the 
peevish answer. " Perhaps I knew more 
of her than anybody else. For when I and 
my husband were staying in Naples in 18—, 
the only apartments we could obtain were in 
the best floor of the Palazzo Z , 

" These Italian princely families, by the way, 
are so wretchedly off that they actually have 
not the means requisite to enable them to occupy 
their ancestral palaces. The prince and his 
family lived upstairs, just as if they had been our 
lodgers. Under these circumstances, there- 
fore, I had every opportunity of being ini- 
tiated into the domestic economy of princely 
households. What misery gilded over! To 
the eye everything was as excellent as it was 
possible to imagine. The suites of apartments — 
at least, those that were open to view — were 
furnished in the old-fashioned style, and still 
bore traces of their former magnificence ; but 
here and there, where it had been necessary 
to patch up the old splendour, the effect was 
far from happy. The antechamber and vesti- 



LETTERS PROM HELL. Ill 

bule were full of lacqueys, who, except for the 
livery they had on their backs, received neither 
wages nor board. They lived on what they 
could manage to squeeze out of the visitors 
who came to see the prince, i buono mano, that 
is, in drink money. In the courtyard below 
might be seen an equipage decorated with 
the princely arms, and resplendent with gilt 
and tassels, with a pair of blood horses, which 
still proudly pawed the ground. It was never 
taken out without three liveried servants hang- 
ing on behind. So much for the outside ! 

"But the interior, my dear friends! A 
meaner, or a stingier household cannot be 
conceived. Only two confidential domestics 
had access to them — an old servant and an 
aged housekeeper, both devoted to the service 
of the princess. Of course, it was a secret 
from the world at large, but not from me. 
The old servant was steward over an empty 
house; the aged housekeeper, cook in an 
establishment where there was nothing to do 
except to make coffee or chocolate. At meal 
times all the doors were locked. Then the 
confidential servant sneaked down the back- 
stairs into the town, and quickly returned, 
followed by a man from the commonest trattori, 
bearing a basket which contained some food of 
the very simplest description. A few fogliettos 



112 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

of the wine of the country and a little fruit 
constituted the meal, which was eaten without 
any regard to ceremony. Indeed eating and 
drinking were looked on as a sort of necessary 
evil, and not by any means as an enjoyment. 
Then the doors were thrown wide open once 
more, and the family were again visible, 
either at home or in the theatre. If it hap- 
pened to be one of the evenings on which they 
were * at home,' the princess and her daughter 
displayed themselves in the only two dresses of 
which their wardrobe consisted. It cost them 
but little to entertain ; there was only ice and 
lemonade handed about ; and the guests brought 
their conversation with them, the principal 
ingredient in the evening's entertainment. 

" The prince occupied some honourable but 
ill-paid post, and was a man of some influence. 
It was said that he was open to a bribe 
through his chamberlain, and that even the 
smallest sums would not be refused. The 
chamberlain received them, and then shared 
them with his master according to an arranged 
tariff. Of course, it was an unequal division ; 
the lion's share and the jackals ! " 

The tale ought to have been brought to a 
close here ; the lady felt it herself, but could 
not stop ; for the company were beginning to 
exchange glances and make secret signs to one 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 113 

another. But after a moment's indecision the 
interesting creature went on : 

" Yes ! I soon learnt by experience how 
matters were. 

" One day I was going with my husband 
through one of the by-streets, in which there 
was a prison. Unfortunately I happened to 
look up as we passed it. Behind the barred 
windows were several disgusting-looking ob- 
jects, who amused themselves in making fun 
of the by-passers, or in begging for alms. 
It was a repulsive sight ! But it was destined 
to prove more than repulsive to me. For 
amongst the wretches there was one face 
which I knew too well, and which recognised 
me, as was plain from the bold, domineering 
look with which his eyes met mine. I shud- 
dered as if I had been stung ; my knees re- 
fused to sustain their burden ; and it was only 
with the greatest difficulty that my husband 
succeeded in getting me past the horrible 
place. 

"Next day a dirty piece of paper was 
secretly handed to me, containing the follow- 
ing words : 

-" * I am- in prison on suspicion of theft.— 
Carcere delle grotte. — Save me, or you are 
lost!' 

" It needed no signature. I knew it was 

VOL. I. I 



114 LfeTTEBS FROM HELL. 

Francesco Patelli, our courier from olden days. 
I had thought him dead, or eke far, far away: 

" Ten years previously I had visited Naples 
for the first time in my life, not as the wife of 
a distinguished and rich gentleman, but as 
lady's maid to his wealthy mother. 

" A French maid, you know,, of the first 
class is always of some importance. As lady's- 
maid I was worth my weight in gold ; and in 
respect of beauty I put all the ladies to shame. 

" Father and son both paid their attentions 
to me; and money and costly gifts were 
heaped in showers into my lap. 

" But I was too prudent to allow myself to 
be caught ; though it was a great amusement 
to me to excite their passions ; for father and 
' son were both brimming over with jealousy 
towards each other. It was very interesting ! 
Indeed, the old man was nearly becoming im- 
becile from love, while the young man almost 
went raving mad. Thus I could twist them 
round my finger as I pleased. 

" But what was to be done ? The little game 
must come to an end sooner or later. I could 
not turn the old man to any account ; but the 
young one — aye, there was the rub ! 

" I could very easily prevail on him to elope 
with me and make me his wife ; but then the 
old man had it in his power to disinherit him. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 115 

If anything was to come of it, this contingency 
at least must be guarded against. So I made 
an appointment with the courier of the family, 
Francesco Patelli, in whose face I had long 
since read the rascal. 

u I let myself be eloped with ! 

" Papa and the courier set off in pursuit. 
Bat there is an old saying, * Festina lente* By 
some unfortunate and unforeseen accident the 
old gentleman departed this life ; a little suspi- 
cion rested on the courier, but unattended with 
further consequences. And when we met after- 
wards at a place agreed upon, in order to give 
him his wages for the service he had rendered 
me, I was the young gentleman's bride, and 
joint-heir to the estate. 

" But now . . . . ! They were fearful 
words . . . . ' Save me, or you are lost ! ' 

" Something then must be done, and that 
quickly ! 

•' I asked for a conference with the prince. 
The gallant gentleman did not make me 
wait long. On the bold supposition that 
what report said was true, I came to the 
point with all the delicacy and the finesse I 
was mistress o£ and begged him to use 
his influence in procuring the release of one 
Francesco Patelli, who was an old servant of 
the family, but who now, poor fellow, was 



116 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

pining away in prison under the groundless 
suspicion of having been implicated in some 
highway robbery. Thereby, I added, the 
prince would gain another opportunity of 
showing to the world at large that in him 
humanity possessed one of its most noble 
champions. 

" The prince was all smiles and compliments. 

" ' If he was a champion of the human race/ 
he gracefully expressed himself, ' it was quite 
certain that I was one too.' 

" He would take the matter into his serious 
consideration, he added; but, as he had so 
very much to do, perhaps it would be as well 
if I were to speak to his chamberlain about 
it, in order that he might remind him of it. 

" Of course I acted on this piece of advice ; 
and in order to refresh the worthy chamber- 
lain's memory the better, slipped a roll of 
notes into his hand. Whereupon he assured 
me that his memory was as trustworthy as 
gold itself ; and that the prince, who was the 
best of masters, lived only to make himself of 
service to his friends. 

" Two days later the prince had the pleasure 
to inform me that poor Francesco Patelli was 
released from prison. 

" But for myself I had had quite enough of 
Naples !" 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 117 

Here ended the tale. 

Is it not true that queer things come to 
light here in Hell ? 

The company round the tea-table at all 
events were of that opinion ; for seldom had 
they spent so pleasant an evening ! 

Reminiscences keep crowding on my mind. 
Things I had done and quite forgotten now 
stand before me in lifelike reality, in outlines 
as fresh as if I had slept but one night on 
them ; and Aunt Betty plays a prominent part 
in the recollections of my childhood. 

When I think of what she was to me when 
but a little child, it seems so real that the tears 
come into my eyes. Not that they really do 
come there. Yet it was not I myself especially 
that reaped the fruits of her self-denial, but 
my father, and for his sake my mother ; still 
it extended itself to all who lived with her. 
She made herself everybody's servant. Many 
a time would she sit up at night in order that 
the poor girls might go to bed ; she, too, it 
was who awoke them in the morning, in order 
that they might lie in bed as long as possible. 
In the long winter evenings she would be at the 
pains of teaching their clumsy fingers all sorts 
of neat and useful needlework ; she looked 
after their clothes, cut out patterns for them, 



118 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

and gave tbem all sorts of valuable hints and 
advice, that they might look tidy and nicely 
dressed, and not like poor girls. Indeed, she 
was very nearly undertaking to teach the 
coachman to read ; but my father interposed, 
and one of the clerks relieved her of that duty. 

Though of a weakly constitution, she could 
undergo almost any exertion, bear any fa- 
tigue. The only thing that ever put her 
out of humour was when any one insisted 
on her taking care of herself. It seemed to 
her to be the most unreasonable thing in the 
world. 

" I," she would say, with an air as if she 
had thrown herself into the furthest comer 
of the room, " should I . . . ?" 

Anything was good enough for her. And 
she had a wonderful command over herself. 
When my mother, for instance, had been hard 
upon her, and she had retired to her own 
room to have a good cry, she would shortly 
come out again with the same gentle face as 
ever, without a trace of sorrow or vexation on it. 

And when she was suffering, or depressed 
in spirits, and came into my father's room, she 
always had some humorous remark on her 
lips, some joke or other to drive away his sad 
thoughts. Certainly her sanguine temperament 
stQod her in good need here ; still, it was more 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 119 

than a natural power that she displayed, it 
was her spirit that was so strong within her. 
Affection was instinctive to her. Odd as she 
was at times, strange as her whims might be, 
curious as her manners, yet somehow love 
always made her hit on the right thing. It 
was impossible for any person to be a better 
Christian, more pious than she was. Her 
education had been sadly neglected ; she was 
very ignorant. Had any one questioned her 
on the simplest matters respecting her faith, 
she would have displayed the greatest igno- 
rance. But not the less was she a rare Chris- 
tian. Though great her defects, though her 
feilingswere many, yet love streamed through 
them all, and brought everything in order. 

At her own request her room was below, 
situated between my father's study and the 
household offices. It was the only room in 
the whole house she could use, she said. It 
was clear that she must have an eye to the 
kitchen ; but it seemed to her to be quite as 
necessary to see after my father. She was 
always afraid lest anything should happen to 
him, if he were out of her sight even for a 
single moment. 

It was a plainly furnished room, but neat to 
a degree. Tidiness was visible everywhere, 
and everything had its appointed place, and 



120 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

could not possibly have been found in any 
other. One peculiarity in the decoration of 
the room was the number of large and small 
objects of the most varied kind that were 
ranged round it. The furniture presented 
as many fiat surfaces as was possible, and 
all of these were fully occupied. And 
here my aunt's odd tastes and fancies were 
apparent. Not only was there a confused 
display of natural and artificial productions 
all jumbled up together, but there were things 
which apparently were not worth the trouble 
of picking up out of the gutter. But my 
aunt knew what she was about. They were 
so many mementos ; and by going through 
them it was easy to follow out the history of 
her life from beginning to end. Of this I 
early got a faint idea, and ever after regarded 
her motley collection not only with a deep 
interest, but with a certain degree of reve- 
rence. There was many a strange history 
attached to them. Not surprising, then, that 
they set my childish imagination to work, as 
I looked at this, now at that, wondering all 
the while what history might be connected 
therewith. Ah ! many a reverie have I fallen 
into while contemplating them. 

Aunt Betty held fashion in thorough con- 
tempt, and used to go about very simply 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 121 

dressed* But though simple to a degree, 
nothing could be tidier or neater than her 
attire. She had ample means to dress differ- 
ently, and she took care to let one know it at 
times. 

" It is not for that," she would say. " I 
could dress as fine as any lady, if I liked." 

And she spoke the truth here. 

She liked to receive a little present now and 
then, not for the intrinsic value of the gift, but 
for the attention it evinced on the donor s part 
Naturally, she liked to be esteemed by those for 
whom she sacrificed herself; so she got at one 
time from my father, at another from my 
mother, all sorts of pretty presents, especially 
choice and fashionable materials for dresses. 
Gratefully and gladly she would accept them, 
have them made up, and then put them by. 
Thus she possessed a large stock of expensive 
dresses, shawls, and mantles ; but it was little 
use she ever made of them . They would get out 
of fashion before she had ever worn them, but 
she took care that they should not get spoilt. 

Sometimes when I went down to see her 
there would be a regular exhibition taking 
place. The bed, the chairs, and tables would 
all be covered with dresses, shawls, cloaks, furs, 
bonnets, &c. " They wanted airing." With 
a happy expression of face she would walk up 



122 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

and down among them, try on first one, then 
another ; run her fingers over the soft silk ; or 
here would be a wrinkle to smoothen out; there 
a speck of dust to brush away, all the while in 
a state of ecstasy. At such times she was far 
removed from all that may be termed reality. 

Sometimes I found her marching abouc 
among her treasures with an elegant bonnet 
on her head ; a shawl or a pelerine thrown over 
her shoulders; a wondrous attire, in strange 
contrast to her usual simple dress. It was as 
if there was an enchantment about them. Evi- 
dently she was herself no longer ; no longer 
poor Aunt Betty hidden away from the lovely 
world outside in a dark smoky kitchen, with 
an unpoQtical little chamber adjoining, where, 
instead of receiving the honour and homage 
due to her, she sacrificed herself to the happi- 
ness of others, only to be known and inade- 
quately appreciated by these few. But whign 
the sun went down, they were all packed up 
once more, and Aunt Betty was again the old 
woman. 

Once or twice, however, in the course of the 
year she would boldly venture a step further. 

Then she would dress herself out in her 
very best, and for some hours would allow my 
father and the servants to admire her from 
top to toe. She did not like showing herself 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 123 

to my mother, who, though ever exemplary in 
her manner towards her, still could not sup- 
press an ironical smile when Aunt Betty came 
out in this manner. She was not naive, or 
else not good-natured enough to enter into the 
spirit of such extraordinary exhibitions, as they 
might well be termed, although aunt was one 
of the most natural creatures in the world. 

Yes, the transformation was complete ! She 
was undoubtedly the lady, and a very distin- 
guished one too. But though dressed out in 
the fashion of the day, she by no means 
belonged to the day, but rather to an age 
long, long gone by, quite different in chival- 
rous and poetic feelings to the present. 

Her manners had more of the old Spanish 
about them than anything else I can compare 
them to, so lofty was her bearing, so gracious 
her smile, so punctilious her demeanour ! In 
her Don Carlos of Spain would have recog- 
nised one of the most distinguished ladies of 
his day. 

If on such occasions the sky happened to be 
quite cloudless, she might take it into her head 
to take a short trip into the town, and show her- 
self to the public, when her peculiar costume 
and somewhat strange manner never failed to 
cause a certain degree of sensation. But she 
never seemed at all annoyed at it. What better 



124 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

testimony can be adduced that she was herself 
no longer then ? It was a sort of trance, a 
brief moment of intoxication, that passed off, 
however, as soon as she had returned home. 
Then all her finery was put away, and it was 
long before it saw the light of day again, 
Generally, she was quite contented to know 
that she possessed fine clothes worthy of a 
lady, and this consciousness was enough for 
her in this as in many other respects. 

Aunt Betty had, moreover, a nice little 
collection of handsomely bound books in her 
room. Whenever she heard speak of an ex- 
tremely good book she would buy it at once. 
Not that she ever read them; "she had no 
time for that," she would say ; " but when I 
am old, my dear, I shall have something to 
amuse myself with, and then I will read them 
all." 

One of her peculiarities was that she could 
never read anything without reading it aloud. 
" She could only understand what she could 
hear," she would say. 

Poor aunt ! 

a When she got old she would read them !" 
Provided that by that time she had not for- 
gotten how to read. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 125 



CHAPTER YIIL 

Op an evening when it was getting dusk I 
was very fond of stealing down to Aunt 
Betty's little room, where I generally found 
her sunk in a reverie. She was never cross 
with me for disturbing her ; she loved me too 
much for that. So she had to tell me stories, 
for which indeed she had a special gift. I am 
quite convinced that she made the greater 
portion of them up as she went on. There 
was no particular meaning in them, but they 
were always interesting. In all of them there 
was a high moral sense underlying them, 
original certainly, but yet at the same time 
so hearty and earnest that they could not fail 
to appeal to a naive feeling like mine. 

It was from my aunt that I received my 
first instruction in religion, of no dogmatic 
character, as may be supposed; on the con- 
trary, she always followed a practical course. 
Ah! how ever could those impressions, so 
deep, so sweet, and so tender, ever fade away 
from my mind ? • 



1 26 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

One evening we were sitting together by 
the window. It was getting dark, but the sky- 
was clear, and the stars were shining with un- 
usual lustre. The sight of them made a won- 
derful impression on my childish mind. Of 
course I had often seen them shining before, 
but when I recall the impression of that hour, 
it is just as if I had never seen the stars shine 
before that evening. 

I wanted to know what the stars really 
were, and what was behind them. So my 
aunt explained to me "that up yonder was 
our Heavenly Father's dwelling, with its innu- 
merable mansions in indescribable splendour. 
And I should go up there some day, if I had 
been a good and holy child on earth." 

I thought this very beautiful ; but it did 
not quite satisfy me. I wanted a more de- 
tailed description ; I required an express 
answer to my questions. 

Now, anybody else but Aunt Betty would 
very likely have been sorely puzzled, but 
her imaginative powers were far too rich 
to allow her to be at a loss. So she told 
me, that behind the stars was a spacious 
and magnificent hall, where God the Father 
sat on the throne of His majesty, with His 
Son on His right hand. In the middle of 
the hall was a Christmas-tree, higher than 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 127 

the highest mountain on the earth, covered all 
over from top to bottom with burning lamps 
and costly presents. And round about the 
Christmas-tree good and holy children danced, 
who had now become angels and God's own 
children ; so joyful and happy were they ! 
And while they were dancing round the tree, 
they sang praises to the honour and glory of 
God, and no one could possibly form an idea 
how lovely it was. As often as they stopped 
to rest themselves a while, all kinds of beautiful 
presents were given to them, and though this 
constantly took place, yet the tree was always 
covered with gifts. 

I was quite satisfied ! 

"But the stars?" I inquired; "what are 
they r 

" I will tell you," answered my aunt. 

" Round the hall is a countless number of 
tiny peep-holes, and the bright light from the 
Christmas-tree beams through them. These 
are the stars ! While the angel children are 
resting themselves, they amuse themselves by 
peeping through these tiny holes, in order to 
see how the children on earth are behaving ; 
if they are good, obedient, and holy ; for they 
are their own brothers and sisters, and they 
love them so dearly, and long after them so 
tenderly. So, whenever you look up at the 



128 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

stars, you must think that behind each star 
there is an angel's eye, which is looking down 
at you. And the star twinkles just in the 
same way as when one winks with the eye. 
So, if you do not wish the angels to shed tears 
over you, you must be such a very good boy ; 
father's, mother's, and my own darling ! " 

Her tale affected me to such a degree that 
I threw myself on her bosom, and burst into 
tears ; and it was some little time before I had 
regained my usual composure and curiosity. 
But presently I had a new question to put. 

"But, dear aunty, where do the naughty 
children go to ? " 

Aunt Betty was nearly getting into a fix 
now. I do not mean to say that she was too 
prudent, but that she was too tender-hearted, 
to tell me about Hell and its terrors ; so she 
only answered : 

" The naughty children go to a dark place, 
far, far away from God the Father and His 
dear Son !" 

But I wanted to know all the particulars, 
and she was therefore obliged to furnish me 
with them. 

" Well," she began, " then I will tell you. 

" The naughty children sit cooped up in a 
miserable back room, where the fire has gone 
out ; and they shiver so with cold, that their 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 129 

teeth chatter again in their heads. The light, 
too, has gone out, so they are obliged to sit in 
the dark, and are so frightened. They cry and 
sob, and beat themselves with all their might ; 
but there is no one — no, not one — to hear them/' 

Her words made me tremble dreadfully. 

" Oh, aunt, I am so frightened," I said, in a 
low tone, as I nestled up to her. 

a Look up at the stars, my child P she 
answered, " and you will not be frightened 
then." 

And she took me up on her lap ; and I was 
afraid no longer. The stars twinkled so en- 
couragingly and cheerfully to me, that I felt as 
if I was under their dear eyes and protection. 

"I should so like to hear them sing!" I 
said, presently. 

" Aunty, dear, how does it sound when the 
angels sing ?" 

" You shall hear, my darling," answered my 
aunt, as she cleared her throat, 

And with a gentle, clear, and soft voice she 
began to sing one of her favourite hymns. 
Oh ! it sounded so lovely in the quiet evening ; 
there was something so childlike in those soft, 
sweet notes that went to my heart, as I kept my 
eyes steadily fixed on the stars, that the illusion 
was complete. It was so dark that I could not 
see her face, but I could see the stars, and they 

VOL. I. K 



130 LETTERS FROM HELL, 

twinkled to me. It was only for a moment ; 
but for a brief while my eyes had taken my 
hearing up with them, and there was no longer 
any earth for me, but only Heaven ; for the 
sounds seemed to come down from above, and 
an indescribable feeling of awe filled my heart. 
Involuntarily I folded my hands, as she had 
taught me, and unconsciously winked with my 
eyes back again to the stars, as a sign that 
the understanding between us was mutual, 
and that I could hear them. 

When the song had ceased, and I had come 
to myself once more, I felt myself to be so 
mean and poor. But I dreamed the whole 
night through about the Christmas-tree in 
Heaven, and the songs of the angels. 

Many an evening afterwards we sat together 
again ; aunt singing to me, and I gazing up 
at the stars. I quickly caught the air, and 
joined in with her, I think aunt was just as 
much a child then as I was. We were both 
of us quite beside ourselves while singing our 
angel songs to the honour and praise of God ; 
for it seemed as if we were drawn up by an 
inward longing for that which was behind the 
stars. 

One evening — but it must have been at a 
later period — my aunt told me the history of 
the rich man and Lazarus : I call it a history, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 131 

and not a parable ; for of all real things there 
is nothing more real than this. When I first 
heard it, too, it was not as a parable, but as a 
plain, simple narrative. And the effect was 
surprising ! True enough I envied the poor 
man his place in Abraham's bosom ; but the 
rich man in torments, without a drop of water 
to slake his thirst, excited my sincerest sym- 
pathy. I was painfully moved. Sobbing, I 
hid my face in aunt's bosom, and was almost 
beside myself with grief. 

" The poor rich man ! What he must have 
suffered ! And how cruel they were to him !" 

My aunt felt quite as miserable as I did. 
Truly, she had calculated on making a deep 
impression on me, but not one of that sort ; so 
she tried all in her power to soothe me, 

" My child, do not take it to heart so ! I 
have good reasons for believing that Father 
Abraham made a great mistake, when he 
refused to give the rich man a mere drop of 
cold water. The Lord can never approve of 
that, and if I know him right, Father Abraham 
wiU be taken to task for it. If so poor a thing 
as a single drop of water were able to soothe 
the rich man, surely Grod would not refuse it. 
He who spared not His own blood, will He be 
so exact about a drop of water ? And, besides, 
did you not notice how the rich man, even in 
the midst of torments, thought upon his poor 



132 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

brothers ? God will never forget that ! Bro- 
therly love cannot but touch God's heart, even 
though the poor fellow were in Hell !" 

It was thus she consoled me. No doubt she 
would willingly, and in perfect good faith, have 
put even a more comforting interpretation 
upon it, in order to solace my grief and dry 
my tears. 

Poor Aunt Betty! she was no theologian. 
There was nothing real to her mind, except 
God's fatherly compassion; that overflowed 
like her own, on all sides. 

And yet, why call her poor? It is I who 
am poor ; though enriched with a fuller expe- 
rience — in Hell ! 

These reminiscences of my childhood, even 
if they were ever so torturing, would absorb 
my thoughts. But torturing, properly speak- 
ing, they are not ; full of pain, it is true, but 
not of torture. I do not know whether you 
can realize the distinction. 

There is then something sweet in these re- 
miniscences even in Hell. As on the one hand 
the pain is more acute, — just as the sweet in 
food or drink produces acidity, — so on the 
other, the torture, to a certain extent, is done 
away with. But this refers only to the recol- 
lections of childhood. If I let my thoughts 
glide on, though here and there a trace of 
sweetness may still be perceptible, it has no 



\ 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 133 

longer any power over the bitterness of my 
remorse, and I become a prey to tormenting 
anguish. 

Thus, I have a lively recollection of the 
sermon that was preached immediately before 
I attended my first communion. It made a 
deep, aye, a piercing impression upon me. 
How ever time, and that so short too, could 
quite eradicate it, I cannot even now make 
out! 

It was from one of the worthiest ministers of 
our Church that I received the last religious 
instruction, preparatory to that holy rite. 

A wild, carnal nature had already begun to 
assert its sway over me ; but he knew how to 
awe me, and to rivet my thoughts. Only a look, 
and I was all attention ; only a word, and I 
listened eagerly. He possessed not only the 
power of captivating, but of stirring one up. 

His text was taken from the following 
words : " Be ye reconciled to God'* How 
could I ever forget them ? But I did forget 
them entirely. Now they recur to my mind, 
and constantly haunt my thoughts. Involun- 
tarily I am constrained to say to myself, " Be 
reconciled to God. . . . Oh, be reconciled to 
God !" But no sooner have they recurred to 
my mind, than some remorseful recollection 
forces its way into my heart, and drives them 
out again. 



134 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

I recollect every single word of his sermon 
from beginning to end. I recollect it, but can- 
not give utterance to it. There is a vast dif- 
ference. Neither does it prove to be the 
slightest benefit to me that I can recollect it ; 
it conduces neither to my edification nor con- 
solation, to say nothing of my peace of mind. 
I can recall the words, but cannot convey a 
single one of them to my heart. It is just as 
if they were hollow ; or, perhaps, it is I who 
am hollow and empty, whom no power can fill. 
I know that they are God's words, that salva- 
tion and redemption are contained in them ; 
but they pass by me. I am the rich man, 
pining after a drop of water ; but it is denied 
me. I exert myself to the utmost to try and 
grasp if only the very smallest portion of 
that which hovers before me, and which once 
I knew so well ; but all my efforts are in vain. 
I often fancy I am very near laying hold of 
it; but the next instant it is gone again. I 
can hold nothing firmly in my grasp. It is 
this unavailing, this hopeless struggle, that we 
have to renew again and again, that constitutes 
one of our greatest sufferings — aye, I might 
say the greatest of all. 

You will now be able to understand how it 
is I have been able to discourse about the 
things belonging to the kingdom of God, and 
yet remain comfortless, hopeless, the prey of 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 135 

despair; of the Saviour, of the Crucified, of 
contrition, repentance, and faith. 

Like everything else in Hell, this too is 
hollow, vain. I have hut the form; of the 
reality I have no conception. I know that 
there is a Saviour, and that He is God's Son, 
but I stand in no relationship to Him what- 
ever. I cannot conceive Him ; I do not even 
know His name. I condemn, detest myself as 
cordially as it is possible to do ; so far I repent. 
But I know nothing of a fruitful repentance ; 
mine, alas ! is a tearless one. 

And, finally, to speak of faith. Yes, I have 
faith too ; but it is an empty, heartless idea, that 
nowhere can find a home. The devils believe 
also ; they are obliged to do so ; but they tremble ! 

"Be reconciled to Grod." How deeply those 
words touched me once ! I thought then there 
was nothing worth living for except to be re- 
conciled to Grod ; and then to die in order to 
go to Him, and be with Him in His heavenly 
kingdom. Again the stars twinkled to me in 
confidence, and I forgot all the world. Oh 
what hallowed, what noble determinations I 
formed in that hour of elevation ! My first 
admission to the altar had become an en- 
trance *upon the road to Heaven. But quickly 
I turned aside from it, ere I was scarce even 
outside the church door. 

And now — I am in Hell ! 



136 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

" Be reconciled to G-od." 

Again and again those words echo in my 
heart ; not though as if they proceeded from 
Heaven, but as if they issued from the depths 
of Hell, accompanied with the most bitter, 
cruel scoffing. 

" Be reconciled to God." 

Ah ! no reconciliation is possible now. 

When I am at a loss what to do with myself 
I repair to the public promenade. Of course 
we have one, and that too of a very remark- 
able kind. Hyde Park, the Champs Elysees, 
Unter den Linden, Corso, Prado, are each and 
all excellent in themselves, but not to be com- 
pared with our promenade. Though in point 
of elegance there may be no perceptible differ- 
ence between them, yet on that very account 
the variety, the motley group, the numbers, 
render the distinction striking to a degree. 
There, for instance, only one fashion is repre- 
sented at a time ; here, on the other hand, a 
thousand different fashions may be seen at one 
and the same instant ; the fashions of centuries 
past. So that it affords a spectacle, so varied, 
so animated, and let me add so ridiculous, that 
it is quite unique. 

Here the greatest contradictions meet, and 
reciprocally help to make each other the more 
prominent. Folly appears with a reality so 
striking that the spectator must perforce burst 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 137 

out laughing, however miserable he may feel. 
On one side you may see people parading 
about wrapped up to their very chins ; on the 
other, going about half naked ; here, with a 
balloon-like circumference ; there, looking like 
a stick. Here again tightly laced and ban- 
daged up ; and there, almost tumbling to 
pieces. Yonder a pair of breeches of fabulous 
dimensions, here a pair fitting as tight as 
a second skin. Here a romantic perruque, 
or a towering toupet, a master-piece of 
art; here again a head almost bald, or a 
profusion of curls arranged without any at- 
tention to natural grace. And so on, ad 
infinitum. 

Crinolines, whalebone petticoats, waistcoats 
reaching down to the knees, skirts down to 
the heels, long waists, and short waists ; pig- 
tails, and all little sorts of tubs or castles under 
the name of hats or bonnets ; powder, rouge, 
beauty patches, &c, who could enumerate 
them all ? 

It is a regular Vanity Fair ! 

All seem striving in the most different and 
ridiculous ways to make each other appear at 
variance with their rank. In the world such 
foolishness was little, if at all, visible ; for only 
one fashion reigned at a time, and that of 
course was excellent beyond compare. But 
here it is forcibly apparent, where all fashion 



138 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

meet, and frequently in the most contradictory 
forms. 

It is inconceivable how human beings could 
ever have made such owls of themselves, have 
hit upon such apish tricks ! One blushes for 
them. Aye ! and they blush too ; for then*- 
selves now, these heroes and heroines of 
fashion ! And though they strut up and down, 
passing and repassing each other with derisive 
looks of scorn, attired in their fools* dresses, 
tney experience no real pleasure. The satis- 
faction they feel is but an illusion hidden up 
in their garments ; they are the very reverse 
of feeling comfortable. For they are per- 
fectly aware of their own wretchedness ; they 
know full well that while they are scoffing at 
others, they too are exposing themselves to 
ridicule. But the part they play is compul- 
sory; and is the more painful, as the dress 
of vanity they wear, gorgeous and grand 
though it be, cannot even hide their nakedness. 
People can see through their garments, how 
many soever they may have on. It is true 
nakedness is the universal law in Hell; all 
come under its sway; but there is a vast 
difference between being naked, and publicly 
exposing one's nakedness to view, especially 
when all the while one feels convinced that 
he is an object of ridicule on account of an 
exaggerated style of dress. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 139 

Oh, fops and dandies ! if you could only catch 
just one glimpse of such a scene, I believe you 
would be entirely cured. 

Strange enough, and yet after all not so 
strange, that the generality of people are of 
the opinion that everything comprehended 
under the word vanity, under which denomi- 
nation of course fashion is included, is not a 
sin, but at best can be considered only as an 
amiable, a pardonable weakness. 

Well, let us suppose then that vanity per- 
haps in itself is no fault. I say perhaps. But 
however it be twisted and turned it cannot but 
lead to a fault, and to moral depravity. The 
mind thereby becomes developed in a totally 
false direction, and the current of life follows 
a perverted channel. The realities of life iade 
away as if shrouded in a mist, aid existence 
becomes a lie, and devoid of fruit. Let vanity 
only once assert its sway, and then with even 
the best will in the world one is unable to 
addict one's self to any serious pursuit ; every- 
thing becomes folly and nonsense. And when 
at last such an one leaves the world, he will 
have done nothing, though there will be thou- 
sands of things he will have left undone, or 
have done badly. 

Who, then, dare to repeat that vanity is 
unattended with guilt, or with danger ? 

I glance back over my past life. Oh ! how 



140 LETTERS PROM HELL, 

clear it all seems to me now ; how prudent I 
would be if I could only live it over again ! 

There is a very general opinion in the world 
that a man must be an exceedingly wicked 
one to find himself in Hell. But let me tell 
you, you shortsighted ones, that it is incon- 
ceivable how little can send a person there, 
when life comes to a close without the Saviour 
having been found. Without Him the soul 
cannot endure the least burden; but with 
Him, aye with Him, though pressed down 
under a mountain load of sin, it can raise itself 
and soar up to Heaven. 

Do you know the Saviour ? I ask as one 
who knows Him no longer. 

I should like to tell you a little tale I once 
heard somewhere or other in Italy ; and yet I 
should think twice before doing so, for there 
are subjects which it does not do to joke about, 
least of all in Hell. 

Still it might do you good to hear it, and I 
do not think it can do me any harm to tell it. 
Not that I entertain any fear about the ma1> 
ter, but only an instinctive feeling of shyness 
or aversion, or whatever you may please to 
term it. 

Well, I will conquer that. It is but a 
romance ; a kind of burlesque popular tradi- 
tion; but there is a deep, an earnest truth 
contained in it. 



\ 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 141 

God had predetermined from all eternity to 
create man. The Devil also knew from the 
beginning that such was God's purpose. And 
God accomplished His design; He created 
man, and it cost Him no trouble at all to fur- 
nish him with every perfection ; for He simply 
created him after His own image. On the 
other hand, it caused the Devil the severest 
exertions to try and find out how he could 
best ruin this lovely and precious creation of 
the Almighty, 

" Now I have it," said Lucifer to his grand- 
mother, who was sitting in a corner of Hell, 
knitting. She was knitting snares, and plots, 
and springes ; of course only for her own 
pleasure, for she could live well enough with- 
out doing that. " Now I have it : I will im- 
plant an evil desire in man's mind, so that he 
will set his heart on what is forbidden, and 
will find pleasure in disobedience. I will make 
him a wrong-doer ; I will !" 

" Very good, little son ; very good !" mum- 
bled his old grandmother ; " but it will not do. 
Desire can be kept in check, and the Lord 
God is strong enough to do that." 

"The deuce!" said the Devil. "Well, I 
must think a little more over it." And he re- 
tired into the deepest abyss in Hell ; he called 
it his study. There he sat for a thousand 



142 LETTERS FROM H3LL. 

years ; his chin resting on his hand, and his 
glowing eyes incessantly staring out straight 
before him. He did not notice how time was 
passing. 

" Now I have it," he exclaimed, when at the 
end of the thousand years he came out from 
his den. " I will fill man's soul with self-love 
and self-will. I will blind him, so that he 
shall only be able to look at what concerns 
himself. I will make a villain of him, great 
or small, according to circumstances." 
* " Very good, my boy ; very good, indeed," 
answered his grandmother. But at that 
moment she dropped a stitch. "Oh, hold 
me a brand. . . . Soh, now I have got it. 
Very good, my boy; but it will not do. 
Self-love and self-will can be rooted out, and 
the Lord God is able to do that." 

" Confound it," said Lucifer ; " then I must 
try again. Now, pazienza, what is to be is 
to be." 

And off he went again to hide himself up 
in his den. 

After the lapse of another thousand years 
he again emerged, and found his grandmother 
exactly on the same spot as before, knitting 
away, and buried in deep thought. She was 
so old that a thousand years made no difference 
in her ; though perhaps she was just a little 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 143 

trifle more beni* and the claws on her fingers 
had grown just a tiny bit longer. 

"Now I have it," said the Devil, with a 
conceited air of triumph. " I will take up my 
.abode in man's heart, and will turn everything 
upside down within him. His nature, and his 
inclinations, shall be entirely perverted. He 
shall take falsehood to be truth, vice to be 
virtue, ignominy to be honour. In a word, 
I will make him a fool." 

" It won't do, my lad ; it won't do," answered 
his grandmother, as she finished a row, and 
bit off the thread with the only tooth she had 
remaining. " There is more than that needed, 
far more than that. What has once been 
overturned, can be placed up again ; the 
crooked can be made straight ; and the Lord 
God is able to do it." 

" I shall soon get tired of it," growled the 
Devil. " This intense studying tells upon one. 
But it would be foolish to give up half-way." 
And so he went off once more to his den. 

Again a thousand years passed, without the 
almanac, and without anybody knowing what 
had become of them. Nothing is better than 
when time passes with as little fuss as pos- 
sible. 

When the Devil returned he really did 
look fagged. His grandmother was seated 



144 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

in her old place ; but this time, contrary to 
custom, her hands were on her lap. Evidently 
she had been longing after her son. Wit or 
fool, she had only him. 

" Now, at last, I have it P exclaimed Lucifer. 
"I will make vanity man's second nature. 
Ape-like, he shall become enamoured of him- 
self, and do all sorts of apish tricks. I will, 
to speak plainly, make him a fool. Man shall 
become the ridicule and laughing-stock of his 
brother man." 

" Ho, ho ! you have hit it there, my boy,* 
whined out the old woman, as joy gleamed out 
of her red, bleared eyes. " The others were 
good, too ; brilliantly conceived ; but they had 
one failing, they were not innocent enough. 
However covetous, however perverted man 
might become, he would constantly feel that 
there was something amiss; he would lose 
confidence in himself, and events would teach 
him caution. Remember conscience ! And one 
can never tell what God in His boundless love 
may please to do for the miserable race. 
' "But with vanity it is quite a different 
matter. It is a grand discovery. Your part 
in the world will be a great one, my son. 
Everything connected with it is so apparently 
innocent, so unlikely to cause suspicion; for 
what can be more innocent apparently than 



LETTERS FROM HELL. ,145 

to wile away the time, to amuse one's self, 
to be joyful amongst the joyous, beautiful 
amongst the lovely, to wear fine clothes, to 
aim after graceful and distingui manners, to 
have one's natural and acquired accomplish- 
ments duly appreciated ? Mankind will give 
itself completely up to vanity ; through vanity, 
lust, self-will and folly will gain the domi- 
nion ; and in perfect innocence they will 
travel along the high road to Hell, True 
enough, the Lord God can do what He pleases; 
there is no doubt of that. But I was not bom 
yesterday, and for my part I cannot imagine 
how God ever can interpose to arrest the 
course of the vain, as with the easiest and 
securest conscience they go fooling along the 
road to Heir 

The old woman had worked herself up into 
such a pitch of excitement that she had grown 
quite eloquent. She shook in her seat, and 
her joints rattled, so withered was she ; and 
her skin, which seemed of all colours, hung on 
her in loose folds. 

" I'm proud of you, my lad!" she resumed. 
* It is only right that I should do my part in 
furthering such an excellent plan. When I 
change my skin I'll make it look so fine for 
you ; it will be so beautiful and soft, and of 
such a lovely colour, that it will take every 

vol. I. L 



146 .LETTERS FROM HELL. 

fool's fancy. It will be your business then to 
force it into the hands of mankind. It will be 
easy enough to do so. With his apish nature 
man will dress himself up in anything, pro- 
vided it be only singular and rather brilliant. 
Then you will see, Diavolino, what beautiful 
things will come of it. They will call it the 
Fashion ; it will be looked on as the most harm- 
less, the most innocent, thing in the world. Ha ! 
ha ! ha ! and it will be neither more nor less 
after all than my old discarded hide. But it 
will be a powerful means of nurturing vanity 
and of making life result in nothingness. 
Then the fool will first appear in human 
nature in a thousand fantastic and ever-vary- 
ing forms. But I must go and take a little 
exercise now, that my skin may slip off all the 
easier. One gets quite stunted from sitting 
still so long." 

Lucifer was in ecstasies. 

" Per Baccho /" he shrieked. " Soh ! at last 
then all is right. God may create His man 
now whenever He pleases!" 

Thereupon he took his old grandmother up 
on his back, and danced up and down Hell. 
It tickled her fancy to such a degree, that she 
nearly split herself with laughing. 

"Mind my skin!" she cried; "my boy, 
mind my skin ! " 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 147 



CHAPTER IX, 

Perhaps you will be surprised to hear me 
speak of Literature in Hell. A few explana- 
tory remarks, however, will suffice to remove 
your astonishment. It is simply thus : As 
every specific evil finds its way down to Hell, 
so also does everything that is of an immoral 
tendency, or exceedingly foolish, descend here, 
whether it be in a written or printed form, 
First come the works themselves, then their 
authors. Thus you see, literature cannot by 
any means be said to be poorly represented 
here ; and as may be supposed, it is tolerably 
one-sided. 

Light literature is very fully represented 
by a number of trashy novels, All civilized 
countries and peoples have contributed towards, 
it, though in very different proportions. Some 
are distinguished by the quantity, others by 
the quality, of their contributions. The last* 
named may be divided into two classes — 
schools they cannot properly be termed — the 



148 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

piquant, and the racy. Both have their spe- 
cial representatives. I mention no names; 
but doubtless it will be an agreeable surprise 
to some authors who are still living to hear 
how extensively their talents are appreciated, 
as they not only write for the world, but also 
for Hell. As far as regards any remuneration 
from this latter place, the authors must be 
content to waive their claim, at least for the 
present, till they come here themselves. 
Then doubtless matters will be satisfactorily 
arranged. 

This light literature is in as great demand 
here as it was in the world. There are those, 
indeed, who, so to speak, live on nothing else. 
But still that soul has not yet been found that 
has received any edification from it. It was 
little enough in the world, forsooth, but here 
it is much Jess. It is a natural consequence. 
In the world an excited imagination and 
inflamed desires could be appeased after a 
fashion, but there is no such thing possible here. 

Neither is there any lack of theological 
works, critical, dogmatical, or homiletical. 

In casuistry, too, we are well supplied ; but 
it forms a special branch of science by itself. 
The olden time is mainly represented by a 
huge mass of priestly lies, gradually brought 
into a system ; of all kinds of fanatical fabri- 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 149 

cations and fantasies on one given theme — 
Religion. The age of Voltaire and of the 
Encyclopaedists is the period when they 
reached their zenith ; but a fresh impulse was 
imparted by Kant and his disciples. Regarded 
in a theological point of view from Hell, the 
French Revolution is neither more nor less 
than a new Messiah-birth ; but how different 
from that first birth at Bethlehem ! For the 
rest, all ages have added diverse contribu- 
tions. 

Of late some critical historical works, under 
the title, " .... of Nazareth's Life," have 
awakened extraordinary interest. Ah, look 
at the vacant space above ! A name should 
stand there, but I am as little able to write it, 
as I am to pronounce it. My hand glides 
over the paper, but the name escapes me. In 
all these writings He, whom I can name- no 
more, is only represented to be crucified 
afresh. From this you will be able to form a 
tolerably clear notion of our theological litera- 
ture. It presents an admirable apparatus to 
any one who wishes to study himself into 
becoming a rank infidel ! 

But even in Hell one may get on the wrong 
track ; even here there is a something worse 
to be dreaded. I never was a theologian, and 
never shall be one in this place S 



160 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

Of course, in addition to these we possess 
a number of works by infidel writers, which 
have either been burnt, or not burnt ; by puffed- 
tip, perverted, crack-brained fanatics ; by false 
prophets of all kinds, who have tried in dif- 
ferent ways to make a capital out of religion. 
As novelties, forsooth, these writings readily 
command a certain degree of silly attention. 
But it is seldom long before the author comes 
here himself. Then the matter is solved in 
a very lamentable, or rather, let me say, in a 
manner, with regard to circumstances in Hell, 
which is extremely exhilarating ; and the new 
theology and doctrine of salvation is confined 
to a certain corner of Hell, where its disciples 
eke out an existence very different to the lofty 
ideas they had formed. 

Philosophical treatises are not so abundant. 
Philosophers on the whole must be regarded 
as very harmless people. Either they are* 
really wise, and therefore good and pious ; or. 
else they have lapsed into a quiet* perfectly 
harmless kind of madness. Only, therefore, 
where a domineering spirit pervades their 
works, do we see anything of them. Thus we 
have not so few interesting attempts, made in 
a room eighteen feet square, not only to mea- 
sure the world, but the whole of existence ; to 
bring the entire creation into a system for 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 151 

time and eternity ; and with a pinch of snuff, or 
a snap of the finger, to solve the riddle of life. 

I allude to the juridical profession only 
en passant, and as by way of parenthesis. If 
I were not to mention it, it would seem as if 
I held it in contempt, and I should be sorry 
even in Hell to have any disagreeables with 
the lawyers. 

The fact simply is, that, however great my 
respect is for jurisdiction, I am totally unable 
to appreciate it : a deficiency on my part, 
doubtless. " Corpus juris" to my mind, is a 
tangled net of enormous dimensions ! 

The works of the Rabulists are ranged in 
long dust-covered rows. What the Rabulists 
are was never quite clear to me ; but I sup- 
pose they are to jurisdiction what the Ency- 
clopaedists were to theology. 

Works of sophistry are only alluded to to 
enable me to say that they are remarkable 
both for their refinement, and for their gross- 
ness ; which of the two elements preponde- 
rates I am quite at a loss to decide. 

As a matter of course, one load of shameful 
law-suits succeeds the other, and the papers 
ewell into mountainous heaps. It is truly 
wonderful how ever the world had eyes to wade 
through them all. They compose one vast 
dung-hill ; but that soil does not exist which 



152 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

it is fitted to manure. There is scarce a single 
parish in the world but has its Aceldama ! - 

With regard to the reviewer's profession, 
we have all kinds of abominable reviews, pro- 
ductions of ignorance, spite, thoughtless love 
of mischief, or pure malice. It is a well known 
fact that reviewers are a peculiar race of people, 
in whom there is but little of what is human, 
because nothing is so remote from their nature 
as humanity. Some people maintain that a 
reviewer must needs be a misanthrope in order 
to write a good critique. But that is saying 
rather too much. Others are doubtless nearer 
the mark when they assert that there is a 
great deal of cynicism about them ; for cer- 
tainly reviewers are sarcastic, greedy, and 
sordid to a degree* 

When I was alive I formed my own opinion 
about this class of people^ but I will by no 
means insist that it was absolutely the right 
one. But I still maintain that reviewers may 
be divided into two principal classes ; the one 
consisting of those who are competent to criti- 
cise, but who take no pleasure in it f in fact, 
would rather not do it. In the world one sel- 
dom sees anything from their pen; here, never* 

The other class comprises those who, though 
quite incompetent, yet, in the Devil's name, will 
write reviews. These flood the world with their 



J 
Jf 



LETTERS FROM HELL^ 153 

productions ; and, either by violence or fraud, 
sway public opinion. Hell teems with them ! 
. This latter class can again be subdivided 
into two branches : professional reviewers, aud 
amateur reviewers. 

The first mostly consists of those who have 
themselves attempted literature, but have 
signally failed in their attempts, and now 
feel themselves called upon to drag as many 
as possible into the same dirty and pitiable 
condition they are in themselves, omitting 
no opportunity, despising no means, where- 
with to accomplish their object. The sig- 
nificant expression "to run a person down/' 
a scientific one by the way, is said to have 
originated with them. Criticism has become 
their handicraft; but the bread they eat is 
sour and bitter. They only live, only breathe 
to discover faults ; and, when these are not to 
be found, to invent them. Their whole life is 
spent in accumulating gall. 

These reviewers are the most active fellows 
imaginable* I once heard it said, that the best 
ratting-cat was a rat itself, that had once tasted 
rat's flesh. If this be true, the same remark may 
readily be applied to the reviewers. Once let 
them conceive a taste for authorship, and 
they become the deadliest foes a poor author 
can have. I have a suspicion that Cerberus, 



154 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

for a time, was nothing but a reviewer, who 
had written or barked in three papers. 

We have a goodly number of professional 
reviewers. We avoid them as if they were 
mad dogs, for they are as snappish as ever, and 
form one of the worst plagues in Hell. Not 
unfrequently they evince the most evident 
symptoms, not of hydrophobia, but of ink- 
phobia, so much so that in some places they 
have been muzzled. 

The other sub-division consists of young 
persons, not devoid of wit, nor deficient in 
talents, but terribly green ; in fact, just libe- 
rated from school discipline. They want some- 
thing out of the way to cool their young blood 
in, and so take to writing reviews for some 
journal or magazine. They do not mean any 
harm by it ; it is merely an excellent method 
for them to show that they are justified in 
wearing a hat, and to forget that only a year 
ago they were schoolboys. They swing them- 
selves up into the cathedra with an air almost 
divine, enveloped, of course, in clouds, and 
belch forth their incontrovertible knowledge. 
I repeat that these fine young fellows do hot 
mean any harm ; it is seldom that they con- 
fine themselves to the subject in hand, but aim 
only at writing pleasantly ; at making a few 
witty remarks, and at getting an opportunity 



BETTERS FROM HEI* 155 

of appearing in Olympian glory. How it 
fares with the poor author, whether he is 
living or dead, is a matter of total indifference 
to them ; they use him but as a stepping-stone 
under their feet, whereby they may be able to 
soar aloft into indefinite and airy heights. 

One might almost be tempted to suppose 
that malicious reviewers in Hell are ranked in 
the same catalogue with murderers, that is, 
murderers in the spiritual meaning of the 
word, and that the first named are guilty of 
wilful murder, the latter only of unintentional 
homicide. But such is not the case. They 
stand in the same rank, or rather list, with 
unjust judges. 

These reviews, then, after a fashion, make it 
possible for us to follow up the literature of 
the world. As soon as such a review arrives 
here, we know at once that some good, or, at 
all events, some harmless book has come out 
above. Of course we only get a distorted re- 
presentation of it, only see the wrong side of 
what has been published. But we are used to 
it, everything goes on in this way. 

Neither are the daily papers, especially the 
political ones, unrepresented ; namely, such as 
are used for a pecuniary speculation, or have 
sold themselves to serve some paltry party in- 
terest, and which do not hesitate, for lucre's 



156 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

sake, to mislead public opinion, or to wheedle 
it. Above all, no sooner does any shameful 
article appear in any paper whatsoever, than 
it comes down straight to Hell, as neatly cut 
out as if it had been done by the scissors of 
a reviser. Parliamentary reports naturally 
afford a goodly supply* You may imagine that 
we get many a good speech to read of ministers 
and deputies: at one time a sheer mass of 
balderdash that makes one's ears tingle, at 
another, a pack of lies from first to last, so art- 
fully woven together and glazed over, that one 
is almost induced to believe that there is ac- 
tually some reality about it. So that we are 
able to follow up the occurrences of the day, 
though after a perverted fashion. It gives 
one really quite a wonderful impression to see 
first one, now another of one's good old ao 
quaintances standing forth and delivering a 
hearty blow, and then disappearing as if he 
had never existed. It puts me in mind of the 
laughable custom I have seen in Holland and 
other countries, on Shrove Monday, viz. of 
knocking the cat out of the basket. 

But you know all this as well as I do my- 
self. What you do not, however, know as 
well as we do, is the multitude of dispatches, 
notes, circulars, confidential communications, 
which are exchanged between the cabinets of 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 157 

the world, in the service of politics, for the 
greatest part for false and crafty ends; you 
know nothing about the protocols which are 
couched in the most obliging, and yet cautious 
and equivocal style, always speaking in the 
name of truth, of righteousness and of huma- 
nity, and yet having no more regard either 
for truth, righteousness, or for humanity, than 
for a sour herring, directly interest or any 
other evil passion comes into play. 

The greater proportion of these political 
emanations never comes to the knowledge of 
the world, but goes down straight to Hell, 
little indeed to our edification. Of course we 
glean a great deal of remarkable information ; 
but it only fills us with an impotent feeling of 
exasperation. I have always suspected it, but 
now am quite convinced, that the falsest, most 
cruel, and most ungodly being in the world, 
is your so-called high politician. 

From this cursory sketch you will see that 
we are by no means deficient in point of read 
mg here ; and it will also have been impressed 
upon you, that out of all this dirty, poisonous 
rubbish, nothing of a refreshing or edifying 
nature can be found. It will not even suffice 
to wile away the passing moment. For the 
more we read, the more miserable do we feel, 
and the more numerous do our evil recollections 



158 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

become. But we must seek dissipation ; we are, 
as it were, driven to it> though we know full 
well that it is nowhere any longer to be found. 
It seldom or never occurred to me while 
I was in the world, that I had anything to 
be thankful for. Health, prosperous circum- 
stances* I enjoyed as things that came as a 
matter of course. If ever I did bestow a 
single thought upon them, I attached but little 
weight to it. For I was never contented; 
neither with life, with the world, nor yet with 
myself. I perceive and feel now what a rich 
blessing from on high lay in all these things, 
greater than tongue can express, and so much 
the greater, because they were quite unmerited. 
When I look back, and I am incessantly coa* 
strained to do so, for there is nothing to look 
forward to, save one thing, one terrible thing 
— Judgment and Damnation — I cannot but 
acknowledge that the benefits which are 
vouchsafed even on a single day in any man's 
life are countless. Life is so rich ! Doubtless 
there is a good deal of misery in the world. 
I myself have joined in crying, " Ah !" and 
" Woe !" over it. But the misery of the 
whole universe shrinks into nothingness when 
compared with that which I have recently 
undergone. Viewed from Hell, even the most 
miserable man on earth has infinitely much to 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 159 

be thankful for. A human being's life, what- 
ever it be, ought to be a life of gratitude. 
Even if out of all the good things of the world 
he has been able to retain naught but fresh 
air, light, and a crust of bread, he has un- 
speakably much to be thankful for. I see it 
all now when it is too late. Here there is 
nothing, alas ! actually nothing to be thankful 
for. But you, who are still alive, you still 
have time to recognise the truth- Oh! lay 
these words of mine to your hearts ; they are 
full of suffering and not devoid of love. 

You will have noticed how incessantly I 
am harassed by evil thoughts, though of their 
extent you can form no idea. My actual 
misdeeds of course torture me ; they lie like 
stones, hot, burning stones on my heart. It 
is not of them I am thinking. But every one 
of my actions in which I have only slightly 
erred, forces itself on my memory ; each little 
untruth, falsehood, wrong, or merciless deed ; 
every little act of deception; every little 
breach of faith and flaw, and so on to infinity. 
They fall on me with knives and scissors, 
cutting and piercing me to the very quick. 
Once -they seemed so trivial, that I paid no 
heed to them, but quickly consigned them to 
oblivion. But they had their signification, 
and now they make it felt without mercy 



160 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

They had quite vanished; they existed no 
longer, each year laid a sod upon their graves. 
But still there was a hidden, an imperishable 
life within them, and now they all come back 
to me one by one. I remember them with a 
preciseness which is indescribably painful, and 
I am completely at their mercy. 

Now that I am thinking of giving you one 
or two instances, in order that you should 
thoroughly understand me, they swarm by 
hundreds before me. I will select the first 
that comes. 

Of late I have been constantly haunted by 
the piteous looks of a ragged little urchin! 
In whichever direction I turn, there he stands 
or rather lies before me, gazing at me with a 
pair of dark, sorrowful eyes. The story is as 
follows : 

" One evening as I was walking outside the 
town, a little boy ran before me, and impor- 
tuned me to buy something of him. But I 
did not want anything, and so pushed him 
aside time after time. Still he would not be 
repulsed, but would keep getting in my way ; 
till at last getting impatient, I took him by 
the arm and pushed him aside. I did not 
paean any harm to the lad, though I must 
acknowledge that at that moment my intentions 
were not quite what they ought to have been. 



LETTERS FROM BELL. 161 

Doubtless, I could have got rid of him by- 
gentler and better means, but to speak plainly 
I was annoyed, and would not be bothered. I 
suppose I must have used rather too much force, 
for the boy fell into the gutter, and began to 
weep bitterly, either because he had received 
some hurt, or because his wares had got 
broken. On turning round, a piteous glance 
from a pair of dark eyes, filled with pain and 
reproach met mine. I could very easily have 
repaired what I had done ; but it never oc- 
curred to me to do so. I was too much taken 
up with myself, and I passed hastily on. 

Now, I ask, would anybody call this a really 
evil deed ? No ; I am convinced they would 
not ! But here in Hell one's feelings are nicer. 
And so after so long a lapse of time that little 
boy's face returns to my memory to add its 
contribution to the measure of my misery; 
truly but an infinite small portion of my entire 
wretchedness ; but the instance cited is but 
one amongst hundreds of others that are con- 
stantly recurring to my thoughts. 

And it is not only those things, those trifling 
things I have done amiss, that rise up and re- 
proach me, but every evil word I have ever 
uttered comes back and makes me smart for it. 
Once they had issued forth from my mouth 
like poisoned shafts ; like poisoned shafts they 

VOL. I. m 



162 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

come back to me and pierce my heart to its 
core. 

Oh, then, weigh your words well, you who 
still have a living voice; for the evil one 
single careless word is capable of producing 
in the world is incalculable. If you will not 
treat others leniently, at least be merciful 
towards yourselves. For the ultimate goal of 
all your evil words is your own heart ! 

AH kinds of conversations, long long since 
forgotten, are now remembered with an accu- 
racy that is perfectly maddening. I can see 
now how every word fell from my lips, every 
look that accompanied it. I wish not to see 
it, but am compelled. And those evil words 
of mine which are now no longer capable of 
injuring others, wound me, and produce in- 
curable sores. 

And not only does every evil deed and 
every evil word come back to me, aye, but 
every wicked thought and idea; and they 
sting my heart, and never let me know a 
moment's peace. 

I have often heard it said in the world, " In 
Nature nothing is lost!" No, nothing, alas, 
is lost in the spiritual world; not even the 
very smallest iota ! 

But not only the evil I have done, but the 
good I have left undone, rises up in judgment 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 163 

before me and condemns me. Innumerable 
are these accusing enemies. Both what has 
existed and what has never been assumes a 
form, and rises up against me. Frightful ap- 
paritions are they, sufficient to people a whole 
world around me, in the midst of which I stand 
alone, and condemned. The good I have neg- 
lected, too ! Ah me ! it is almost worse than 
the evil I have committed. For the temptation 
to evil was often so strong, it would have cost 
such great exertions, entailed such severe sacri- 
fices, to have withstood it. But to have done 
that which was good would have cost little or 
nothing. It is all so clear to me now. 

Yes ! it is passing strange what a clear view 
one gets of the world and of human life from 
Hell! 

The man who neglects to do good is in- 
excusable ; for however limited his means and 
resources may be, opportunities are con- 
stantly recurring. It all depends upon his 
possessing a heart. Therein lies the power — 
there the blessing. By a wondrous contri- 
vance of Him whose being is love; there is but 
a trifling difference between poor and rich in 
this respect, between the powerful and the weak. 

Oh, take care, then, my brothers and sisters, 
you who still see the light of day ! take 
care that you never become the prey of a 



164 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

bitter remorse ; how bitter I cannot tell yon ! 
Let no opportunity of doing good pass by you. 
It is so easy, and it costs so little. For the op- 
portunities you allow to pass by unused will 
some day return to accuse and condemn your 
soul through all eternity. 

I am not addressing myself now to the 
really hard-hearted ones. God alone can 
touch them. But there are some soft hearts 
which only need a sunbeam, or a warm breath 
of wind to open them. It was by no means 
my misfortune in the world to possess a hard 
heart; on the contrary, under ordinary cir- 
cumstances I was readily moved to compassion. 
But either I did not pay any attention to what 
concerned other people; or, if I did, it was 
with a glance so fleeting that it was forgotten 
again directly. Ah ! if I only knew that my 
experience would be of benefit to you, how it 
would sooth my pain. But I do not know it, 
and however fain I would believe it, I am com- 
pelled to entertain serious doubts about it ; for 
doubt, horrible doubt, is one of the chief com- 
ponents in the pains of Hell. 

Again I feel a desire to exemplify what I 
have said, A living example has such a 
wondrous power about it. Aye, and a living 
example it is, though it comes from the realms 
of Death : 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 165 

Two doors from my house there dwelt a 
poor family in a cellar. As I passed by it my 
eyes used involuntarily to fall upon a window 
in it. There was a bald-head in constant motion 
that rivetted my attention, but it was a long 
time before I could get a view of the face 
belonging to it. He was a father of a large 
family, and sat on that bench bent over his 
work with unflagging diligence from morning 
till night. Apparently not necessity alone, 
but interest also made him so eager. He was 
a wood-carver of some talent, and used to 
make toys for a large toy warehouse in the 
town. Strange enough, he excelled especially 
in making all kinds of wild, savage beasts. I 
say strange enough, for he looked far from 
being ferocious himself; to judge by the ex- 
pression of his face, a meeker, gentler, more 
pious soul could not have existed. He got 
over his work very quickly, and the window- 
ledge above him was filled with lions, wolvesj 
and hyaenas marching one after the other. 
Hi&iforte lay especially in wolves and innocent 
lambs. Still he found it hard work to support 
his family, which was already large, and kept 
increasing regularly each year. But as far as 
I could judge, they were a very, happy family. 
The wife took in washing, sold little billets of 
wood for the stoves, and baked potatoes ; in 



166 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

short, helped in a variety of ways. Thus, 
either assisted the other, and with care they 
managed to make both ends meet. 

But a time of adversity arrive.d. The toy- 
warehouse failed. No longer could I see the 
shining bald-head in the deep cellar ; all was 
as dark as the grave down there. What had 
become of it ? I asked myself once. And after 
that I never troubled myself further about the 
matter. 

But one day as I was taking a walk outside 
the town my memory was refreshed. I not 
only saw my bald-head again, but his whole 
person. The poor, infirm old creature, who 
had hitherto been occupied only in very light 
work, had been obliged through sheer neces- 
sity to work in a brick yard — a labour of the 
severest nature. His knees literally tottered 
under him, and the sweat rained down in big 
drops from his forehead. 

I felt sorry for him ; it was plain he was 
working himself to death. His life was in as 
great danger as if all the tigers, wolves, ^and 
hyasnas he had ever made were living animals, 
and were attacking him. And there was yet 
something more touching still about the case. 
Once or twice I was witness to a family scene. 
The wife would bring her husband his dinner, 
all the children with her, one on her arm, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 167 

another in her apron, and the rest following 
her on foot. I saw how tenderly she wiped 
the perspiration off her husband's brow ; how 
the children clung around him, and how grate- 
ful he seemed for all the attention and care 
lavished on him, and how strong he made 
himself appear for their sakes. 

I felt much moved at the scene, and on my 
return home decided that something must be 
done for the poor family. It would not have 
been difficult for me. I could easily have got 
the man a situation as porter, inspector, or 
some other light employment; for from the 
position I held I had many such opportunities. 
But, meanwhile, I had to leave home on busi- 
ness; and on my return I had forgotten all 
about the matter; when it did recur to my 
mind, it was too late. The poor things (what 
else could have been expected ?) had perished. 

But there is even yet worse to follow. 
Whether it is only a fantasy belonging to the 
juggleries of Hell, or whether it is really a 
kind of clairvoyance peculiar to its denizens, I 
am often able, as it were, to follow up the evil 
I have been the cause of on its way through 
the world, and to mark how it has spread 
from one to another without bound or limit. 
It is far from my wish to track its course, but 
I am compelled to do so from stage to stage, 



168 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

till it accumulates into one, and I can perceive 
no more. 

Terrible are the effects, fearful the misery 
which one bad, or even thoughtless act, aye, 
or one careless word is able to accomplish in the 
world. Singly and alone they are mischievous 
enough ; but the mischief would be but pro- 
portionately small if they exhausted themselves 
in one blow, and then perished or became 
powerless. But such is not always the case! 
Frequently they possess a diabolical power of 
spreading, so that it is in their consequences 
they first become harmful. One misery fol- 
lows on another indefinitely. It is not the 
actual evil in and by itself that lays the world 
waste, but its consequences. 

This leads me to think of offences. 

Oh, what a terrible instrument are they in the 
world, more terrible than any one can possibly 
imagine ! With good reason has woe been 
cried over those from whom offences come. 
They are worse than the plague-smitten ox 
the leprous. Offences especially have a 
devilish power of propagating themselves. 
There is no limit to their consequences. The 
evil which bad men commit is in itself nothing 
when compared with the evil which they cause 
by a scandalous example. The wicked prin- 
ciple issues forth ; no longer have they any 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 169 

control over it. It now proceeds by itself, 
knowing no restraint. Its consequences are 
felt long after the persons are dead and gone, 
and the responsibility, therefore, becomes 
greater. Ah ! it is fearful. 

It is painful to say it, but I fear it is in this 
very point the demon within me has gained 
such strength. Offences have proceeded from 
me in all directions, and unconsciously I have 
been the destruction of thousands. It is all 
clear enough now ; one thing comes back to 
my mind after the other with the most bitter 
remorse, and makes itself the more felt, be- 
cause I believe that I am able in the spirit to 
track the evil which once proceeded from me 
on its course through the world, with its end- 
less consequences of woe. 

Do you understand me ? You will do so if 
I only adduce one or two instances. 

One evening I chanced to meet a num- 
ber of jovial young fellows at a large banquet. 
I had been especially invited to honour the 
entertainment with my company. The distin- 
guished part I was asked in all sincerity to 
take pleased me not a little, so I went. Under 
the circumstances, of course I felt it my duty 
to take on myself to amuse the company. 
That evening I found it no difficult work ; I 
was witty and humorous; and my humour 



170 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

waxed stronger and stronger with excitement. 
A great number of speeches were made and 
toasts proposed. At last I rose to propose a 
toast and make a speech. I knew I was 
looked up to as an authority by the young 
fellows, so that I could make them believe and 
do anything I pleased. I therefore stood up 
as one from whose mouth streams of rich 
experience flowed. 

" Only venture" was the subject of my speech. 

I alluded to what I had attained in the 
world, how rich my life had been in en- 
joyments, nearly all of them the fruits of 
" only venturing." In that little word a trea- 
sure of knowledge was contained, greater than 
all the treasures of Solomon. What better 
advice, therefore, could I give my young 
friends before whom the world had just un- 
folded itself, than "Venture, only venture, 
venture to be happy !" 

My speech was received with clamorous 
applause. The wine was strong, but my speech 
was stronger ; they were intoxicated with my 
words. Some, indeed, soon shook it off, but 
with three or four at least the baneful advice 
struck root, and they issued forth into the 
world to put into practice a maxim three- 
fourths of which was false. It could not 
be otherwise than destructive to them, and 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 171 

through them to numberless others. For the 
false principle which appeared so grand and 
brilliant, extended further from soul to soul. 
Alas ! it is spreading still, and I see no end to it. 

Yet another incident, and one of the most 
burning. 

I had been on a visit to a friend of mine in 
the country, and was j list on the point of leaving. 
The carriage was at the door, and I was 
actually stepping into it, when I recollected 
that I had left something in my room ; so I 
hurried back to fetch it. There was a maid- 
servant there, busy tidying up ; she was young 
and uncommonly pretty, scarcely eighteen 
years old. All at once the whim seized me, 
and I threw my arms around her, and gave 
her a kiss. With a feeling of injured modesty 
she disengaged herself from my embrace, and 
blushing deeply stammered forth : 

" Sir, I am a poor, but a virtuous girl !" 

" Poor, my child ! what ? you poor !" I 
answered. " With a beauty like yours, you • 
are immensely rich ; you could buy the heart 
of a millionaire !" 

Thus I spoke in the thoughtlessness of the 
moment ; for I did not attach any meaning to 
my words ; it was only one of those silly ways 
of expressing myself peculiar to me at that 
time of my life. 



172 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

The poor girl stood blushing before me, 
while I continued in the same tone and spirit : 

" And now, my beauty, to thank me for the 
golden lesson I have given you, you shall 
bestow a kiss on me of your own free will ; 
perhaps we shall never meet again." 

She resisted ; but I was young, and good- 
looking, too, and I knew how to wheedle the 
fair sex. In short, the result was, she let me 
embrace her, and gave me a hearty kiss. The 
girl was completely in my power ; I felt it in 
a moment. But the moment was not mine ; 
the postillion was-blowing his horn impatiently, 
and I was obliged to tear myself away. But 
as if to prove to her that her good looks were 
a productive capital, I pressed a piece of gold 
into her hand. 

Now, I did not see much harm in all this ; 
and perhaps the greater part of the world 
would be of the same opinion. But in reality 
I had saddled the world with a tremendous 
evil. Not only had I instilled poison into the 
young girl's veins, but into her very heart. 
Her innocence was gone, and ruin had already 
struck its roots deeply. I can track it all now, 
and can see in the spirit what were the 
results. 

She was engaged to a respectable mechanic. 
But her capital, she considered, would never 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 173 

gain the coveted interest from him, and she 
discarded him, to his great and unconquerable 
sorrow. 

So she went out alone into the world, to 
make her capital of beauty remunerative. She 
spread her snares far and wide ; but, however 
prudently she intended to work, it ended in 
her being caught herself. She became the 
victim of a wily seducer. Yet this did not 
check the principle on which she had been 
working ; on the contrary, it now began to 
flourish and to bring in interest. 

As a courtezan she continued her course, 
and soon became one of the most accomplished 
and artful of her race, and thus proved the 
ruin of one fool after another, and her capital 
brought her in large returns. For a time she 
almost wallowed in gold. Such were the 
fruits of my first ducat ! But she never be- 
came rich ; all her wealth disappeared as it 
came, in senseless waste. Before she .was 
aware of it, her capital was spent. For a 
time she struggled on under the lowest depths 
of degradation to keep herself up. But her 
doom was sealed, and her end was most mise- 
rable. But this was not all. The poison 
which had tainted her blood transfused itself 
into the veins of others with whom she came 
in contact. And even the evil principle which 



174 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

she owed to me she diligently transferred into 
other women's hearts, and so from heart to 
heart it spread and grew — Oh, woe ! oh, woe ! 
— to infinity ! Beauty is capital ; make it pay, 
make it pay ! 

Such was the fate of one with whom I had 
so little to do, that I did not even know her 
name. How must it have fared with many 
others ? How with Anna, against whom my 
sin was a hundred times greater ? Strange, 
the spirit will not assist me in tracking her 
destiny ! Or is it true that I dare not track 
it ? Most probably it is between the two. If 
she were once to appear before me, and drag 
me after her. Oh, how terrible it would be ! 

There is a fearful power in offences ! Those, 
therefore, who live among young people, and 
who are looked up to as an authority by them, 
have a tremendous responsibility resting on 
them. Consequently, bad educators of chil- 
dren, parents, masters, guardians, are here in 
numbers. They come to Hell first ; it cannot 
be otherwise ; then follow the poor children 
they have ruined, and their children's children, 
and so on ; generation after generation, they 
meet here with bitter, terrible reproaches. 
I myself am among the number of these 
wretched people, so that I have good grounds 
for speaking as I do. I know what I have to 



/ 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 175 

look forward to. It is, namely, to see Martin. 
Poor boy ! He was brought up, as it were, 
by offences. I can truly say, but, alas ! with 
no good meaning, that he became what I made 
him. He was me all the world over. But he 
is still alive ; he may improve. But what is 
he likely to be, and his children after him, 
after the instruction he received from me? 
In the world I had no family. Alas ! here in 
Hell, I shall chance to have a large one. 
Still let me say, God watches over all. For 
Martin, and for his, there is still a Saviour ! 

How I loved him spite of all his rude beha- 
viour ! Perhaps it was sheer selfishness on my 
part ; or perhaps I loved him because I found 
the reflection of myself in him. But it was a 
strange affection. At last it was mingled with 
envious feelings. I could not but feel jealous 
of him, when I saw how each day he grew hand- 
somer, more lovable, more paptivating, than 
myself; how gradually he became my success- 
ful rival in everything. But these feelings of 
jealousy so far from diminishing the love I felt 
towards him, on the contrary increased it. One 
of these impressions is especially lively in my 
remembrance. 

As he grew up I paid great attention to 
his physical development. His mental edu- 
cation I left for others to see to, and I did 



176 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

not ask many questions; but I took upon 
myself to instruct him in all kinds of gym- 
nastic and manly accomplishments. An ac- 
complished hand myself, I taught him fencing, 
shooting, riding, boxing, and wrestling. He 
was unusually strongly built, and was per- 
fectly and symmetrically made. Even before 
his twentieth year the athlete was so far de- 
veloped in him that he would have excited 
admiration in Greece or in Rome. We used 
to wrestle nearly every day, and each day I 
noticed that he became stronger. A time 
soon arrived when I perceived that it was all 
I could do to keep my own against him. And 
even that soon passed. One day — the thought 
of it even now excites me — he lifted me off 
my feet three times, hugged me in his arms, 
and threw me with violence to the ground. 
Henceforth he was my master. I might have 
foreseen that it would be so soon. For not 
only did my powers decrease with increasing 
years, but his grew stronger. Still it vexed 
and worried me ; and I could not forgive him. 
But at the same time, strange to say, I was 
inwardly proud of him, and admired him pas- 
sionately for it. 

The jealousy I entertained towards him, 
however, became the more confirmed, when 
at last he superseded me in the affections of 



LETTERS FROM HELL; 177 

that young person on whom I had cast my 
eyes. Even the love I. bore to him could not 
stand this. 

Will he come? I dare scarcely doubt it. 
He belongs to me, and I am in Hell. Then 
I shall get an answer to the burning question 
that was on my lips as I left the world, and 
which incessantly makes my heart ache now. 
But dare I wish for an answer ? A terrible 
suspicion often comes over me that the answer 
must contain something fearful. But — even if 
I should have to swallow all the pains of Hell 
at one gulp — I must and will have that ques- 
tion answered, " What had he to reveal ?" 



vol. r. n 



178 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER X. 

What an oppressive stillness reigns in Hell 
among its thousands of millions and millions ! 

I thought at one time I should get used to 
it, but that will never be. What a transition 
from the noisy, boisterous world ! But how- 
ever wild our life, not a sound is heard among 
us. Yes ! there is certainly a sound connected 
with the speech of individuals, but it is heard 
only by the ears for which it is intended. 
Perhaps this, too, is only imagination; we 
catch at the words, and conceive the sound. 

Hell is full of noisy people. Can you con- 
ceive how it is ? However much they exert 
themselves they are not able to give utterance 
to the smallest sound. If ever they longed for 
a stupor to seize them it is now ; but stupor 
is nowhere to be found. They become the 
wretched victims of the confusion they create. 

It snowed to-day, for the first time, though 
there are no signs of winter ; the lowest degree 
of cold ever prevails here with the greatest 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 179 

heat. It snowed to-day a perfect storm of 
privy-counsellors, counsellors of justice, and 
of state ; court-marshals, excellencies, petty 
knights, commanders, and grand crosses of 
various orders, &c. &c. 

A number of the last "... she Tidende? 
which came in soon after, explained it all. 

In one of the petty states of the world a 
colossal distribution of titles and orders had 
taken place on the occasion of a marriage. 

Small nations are generally madder than 
others in this respect. But, at least, they 
should reflect that a whole nation consisting 
only of knights and counsellors would pre- 
sent one of the most ridiculous spectacles 
in the world. But such appears to be their 
aim. Indeed, many have brought it to such 
a pitch, that it is not only considered no 
honour to wear a title or a decoration, but 
rather a disgrace to be without one. It is 
all the same to us in Hell. We can very 
well put up with a little snow. However 
fast it comes down, the flakes are dissolved 
just as in a thaw, leaving no traces behind 
saving a certain unpleasant odour. 

Still a word of comfort should be said on 
behalf of these poor titled folk; that all 
titles and orders do not come down to Hell. 
Some of them find their proper place in 



180 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

the world, though generally it is vanity alto- 
gether. 

Apropos of the " . . . she Tidende !" There 
was a very remarkable article in it, headed 
"Freedom on the broadest foundation." It 
was really very well written, and its style 
was so full and overflowing, that it afforded 
quite a peculiar interest to read between the 
lines. The author is rather low in the world 
at present, but would willingly be higher. 
Therefore, it is that he would like to have 
all " constraining bands loosened." If ever 
he comes into authority he will be one of 
the worst despots (not to say tyrants) the 
world has ever known. Another wolf in 
sheep's clothing! But it is in vain I cry, 
« Take heed, take heed !" The world will be 
imposed on. 

As the light waxes stronger, my heart be- 
comes more and more uneasy. I look forward 
with anxious expectation to the hour when the 
splendour on yonder side the abyss shall be 
revealed to my eyes. Paradise seen from tor- 
ment must indeed be a fearful sight. It will 
be as if a sword pierced me through and 
through. But for all that, I can do naught 
but long, and say, " Strike ! here is my poor 
doomed heart." 



LETTERS PROM HELL, 181 

Was there not something once called " Our 
Father?" 

Yes ! I cannot doubt it, and it con- 
tained a boundless and unlimited blessing. 
I gasp ; I torture myself to repeat it ; it seems 
as if it were on my lips, as if I needed only 
to say "Our Father," and the rest would 
follow. But I say it one time after another, 
twenty, aye, a hundred times, and can get no 
farther. Then I try and invert the words, 
but it is equally useless. I know well enough 
who this Father is. But he is no longer my 
Father. He belongs to me no more. No 
wonder, then, that I cannot get the blessed 
words forth. Still my soul cannot refrain 
from incessantly trying, and it wastes itself in 
its fruitless endeavours. 

It is a good thing that we can choose our 
society here. I do not know how we could 
endure it, if we were obliged to associate with 
all the riff-raff, such as thieves, robbers, mur- 
derers, traitors, perjurers, and hypocrites, that 
one meets. Do not be disgusted at my using 
the word riff-raff. The prejudices of the world, 
its customs and loose expressions, still cling to 
us, and we cannot, however much we wish it, 
get rid of them. True ! we are riff-raff alto- 
gether, I know that well enough. There is no 
more perceptible difference between us and the 



182 LETTERS FROM HELL, 

vulgar herd, than consists in our more deve- 
loped consciousness, the shadow of the more 
refined education we received in the world. 
However, imagination does not do so little 
after all, and if it was of importance in the 
world, here it is all in all. Our lpisdeeds may 
he fully as had as those of the multitude, 
hut they are not so gross ; indeed, in a great 
measure, they are quite refined. Therefore, 
we speak now, as of old, of the rabhle, and pick 
our company as well as we can. The rabble, 
as I said, consists of thieves, robbers, mur- 
derers, and of all kinds of low villains ; while 
amongst us, seducers, gay people, the covetous, 
the haughty, and all kinds of knaves are to 
be found, that is to say, quite respectable folk. 
Like naturally seeks like. Human nature in 
Hell is principally represented by sympathy. 
Indeed, this instinctive impulse is even more 
lively than ever amongst us. 

Sensitiveness, as you can readily imagine, 
is the prevailing ingredient of life in Hell. 
Alas ! so much the worse ! Therefore we are 
very exclusive, and endeavour to keep every- 
thing unsuitable out of our social circle ; and 
though it is a difficult matter, yet we are very 
particular (nice is, perhaps, a better expres- 
sion) in this respect. Not only do we chassez 
what is mean and vulgar, but even what is 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 183 

ugly and repulsive, without respect of persons ; 
so fine, so excruciatingly fine, are our powers 
of perception. 

Some time ago, a pretty young woman came 
here, a little coarse and unrefined, perhaps, 
but only the more attractive from her defi- 
ciencies. Her history is told in a few words. 
She had deserted her old blind mother to 
follow her lover, a harum-scarum circus rider, 
through the world. She died suddenly in the 
midst of the intoxication of her passion, con- 
sequently she lifted up her eyes in torments. 
She glows, shakes and trembles with anxiety 
and nervous fear as we do, and she is a prey 
to a pining desire. She pines for her mother, 
whom she will never see again ; and for her 
lover, whom she is looking for with the most 
eager expectation. Still she loves him. Dare 
she then hope that he will come ? She cannot 
help nourishing the cruel wish. In it consists 
her sole, aye, her sole hope. And, moreover, 
come he must, they have sworn to be eternally 
true to each other. But she may have to wait 
long. 

Meanwhile- he, the noble one, is never out 
of her thoughts ; he is the hero of all her 
dreams. She sees him naturally, as she saw 
him the last time, in all the enjoyment of 
youth, beauty, and strength, in glittering 



184 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

attire, on the prancing steed, the admiration 
of the assembled multitude. 

At length he comes, but hobbling on 
crutches, with running eyes, and tottering 
knees. All passion, all pleasure, has long 
since died out in him. 

What a meeting ! What a recognition ! 

She shudders at the distorted image of her 
precious, her incomparable one. But still she 
cannot help lavishing her caresses on him. In 
vain he pushes her aside ; in vain does he seek 
to fly away : she hangs over him ; where he 
goes there she is present. In short, the case 
became so repulsive that we could endure it no 
longer. The young woman had hitherto been 
one of us, but we were obliged to get rid of 
her, so it was not long before the pair had to 
move off. 

Not long ago, another woman came here, 
young no longer, but still attractive ; one of 
those blue-eyed, auburn-haired, languishing 
beauties which Germany only can prodyce. 

And the reason of her coming to Hell ? 

Well, there was none other reason but her 
excessive devotion to her husband. It was 
touching to hear how she had sacrificed every- 
thing for him. And he proved unworthy of 
her love. Her sin was that she had sacrificed 
too much for him, yes, far too much ; not he*- 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 185 

self alone, and all the world besides, but even 
God. Yes ! she had set up her husband in God's 
place, and he had been her idol. Great though 
her affection was, it was a false essence ; lovely 
and touching as it appeared, it was at bottom 
but an intensified, egotistical propensity. 

In Hell she is consumed by pining after 
her husband. In life she knew but one feel- 
ing ; therefore she knows now but one torment, 
excepting, of course, inevitable remorse. At 
length her husband comes, the villain, with 
a heart occupied by another passion ! 

Is she not severely punished ? Even in Hell 
she excites commiseration, and her case creates 
a great impression. But high society in Hell 
could not exist if it did not pay some regard to 
decorum. On these matters we are inflexible. 
Of course it is only the shadow of decorum I 
am referring to. 

Perhaps you will say it must be a great ad- 
vantage to be able to pick one's company in 
this way. Yes, it certainly is an advantage ; 
but, alas, my friend, there is nothing in Hell 
but what results in misery. This power of 
selection, therefore, is extremely painful ; for 
we feel well enough that at bottom it is vanity 
— a mere form, into which we endeavour to 
transfuse reality. 

I spoke just now about remorses ! They are 



186 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

numberless; but they compose only one moiety 
of our torments ; the other is made up of lusts 
more ardent than ever, because, without a body, 
without a world, they cannot be appeased. 

Could you believe it, I still sigh after that 
wench — she was certainly very pretty — whom 
I once took off the very doorsteps, and who re- 
paid me so badly by preferring the boy to the 
man, and in becoming Martin's wife, or, rather, 
mistress ? I am full of a passion, the like of 
which I have never felt before. And so it is 
in all respects. I pine after amusement, good 
living, old habits, empty honour — aye, even 
sordid meat and drink. I have no longer any 
stomach, and yet I pine to get it filled. 
Everything is pain, continuous pain ! ^ 
There is only a moment in our existence 
when all envious longings, all passions, in a 
word, everything in us, all our thousand pains, 
rest awhile. (Oh ! but do not think we are 
free from pain !) Our ordinary pains certainly 
lose power, but an indescribable anguish comes 
in their stead. Now and then, for instance, a 
horrible dread runs through Hell, a kind of 
fearful panic, the like of which the world has 
never known. Everything is arrested in its 
course, stiffens, becomes mute, and trembles 
and quakes. Something awful is occurring. 
We do not see it, but we feel it, and we all 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 187 

know what it is. It is Satan reviewing the 
souls in Hell. As yet he has no power over 
a single one of us, for judgment has not yet 
been pronounced. But he can wait. He 
rejoices at our increasing numbers. He resem- 
bles the shepherd who takes delight in looking 
at his flock, though the time for slaughter is 
not yet come. He knows that sooner or later 
a numberless flock will stand on the left of the 
Almighty's throne, and that this herd is his to 
all eternity. 

We see nothing ; but we feel and shudder. 
Meanwhile, the flock is aware of the proximity 
of the wolf. And yet at times one can see, 
when the horrible dread, for instance, occurs 
on that night which we call the Night of 
Death. What is to be seen I know not ; I have 
never experienced it, and it would be worse 
than foolish to tempt any one to speak of it. 

In my youth I was many a time on the 
road to become a good, christianlike, pious 
individual. But each time it dissolved itself 
into nothing. The recollection of it has some- 
thing very sad, and yet inexpressibly touching 
about it. It was Lili who chiefly was the 
instrument of this mercy of God, which so 
unhappily, so shamefully came to naught. 
From the very first time I ever cast my eyes 



188 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

upon her, she obtained a hidden, inexplic- 
able mastery over me. Do not say directly it 
was my evil lusts and passion that brought 
me under its influence. Nay, it was some- 
thing better ; it was a hallowed power. All 
children, I think, possess it more or less; 
but Lili possessed it in its fulness. 

In winter-time after dinner was over we 
used to sit round the fire before the lights 
were brought in. My mother generally took 
her siesta, while Lili and I gave up ourselves 
to reverie. In what totally different regions 
our fancies hovered ! I could sit for hours 
watching her as she sat on a low stool in the 
full glare of the cheerful fire. I was in the 
dark, and could not be seen, and this made my 
enjoyment the greater. 

Generally, she would sit with her hands 
clasped round her knee, her favourite posture 
in her reflective and speculative hours. How 
lovely she would look by this light ! A little 
pale, perhaps, but all the more beautiful. The 
glare from the fire flickered on her large dark 
eyes. They had a wondrous brilliancy ; their 
equals could nowhere have been found. Her 
delicate features seemed illumined. Now and 
then a deep-drawn breath or sigh would show 
how busy she was within. I almost devoured 
her with my glances. Had there been any 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 189 

truth in the mystic doctrine of magnetism and 
sympathy she must have noticed it. Perhaps 
she did; for at times she would become very 
uneasy under my gaze, as if under the influence 
of some hidden but mighty power. 

It all stands out so clear to my recollection. 
At such moments I felt tempted to start up and 
snatch her to my bosom. But I did not do 
so; had I frightened her, all my pleasure 
would have been lost. 

But sometimes she would sit by my side, 
and we would pass the hour in a low, con- 
fidential conversation. 

u What P you exclaim ; " what conversation 
of an interesting nature could possibly take 
place between you and her ?" 

Yes ! you may well ask. But it was she 
who interested me. 

One evening I asked her what she was 
thinking of, as she sat steadfastly looking into 
the fire. 

" What am I thinking of?" she repeated, in 
her soft tone. " Yes, of nothing, but that I 
am thinking. It seems as if I had flown far, 
far away to a foreign land over the mighty 
seas — yes, to another world beyond the sky. 
Sometimes, I even lose myself in my flight. 
I fly to Louisiana, that lovely laud, where 
everything is so different to this ; much richer, 



190 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

larger, and more beautiful, and where the sad 
winter is a thing unknown. There stands a 
house on the banks of a large river, with pilas- 
tered hall and verandah beneath the shade of 
pine trees and planes. I traverse the lofty 
saloons, but they are empty : my parents are not 
there. I hurry through the garden, through the 
grove, across the meadow, but can find no 
abiding place. No one will recognise me. 
Dark forms flit across my path, and I pause to 
ask them questions, but they all shake their 
heads sorrowfully at me, and hurry by. 

" Heart-broken I turn away from the beau- 
teous but desolate spot, and fly back again over 
the sea. Unwearied I go 'from land to land, 
seeing many wondrous things, and exchanging 
in my flight words with many remarkable and 
amiable persons. But wherever I am there is 
something I miss. Then I soar up higher 
and higher in my impetuous flight above the 
clouds, aye, above the moon and the stars. 
All at once I find myself in the most lovely 
garden. I had thought nothing could surpass 
Louisiana, the home of my birth ; but this is 
far, far more beautiful. It is Paradise ; God's 
own garden. There at last I find my parents : 
I knew well enough I should meet them 
again. There, too, I find peace; there is 
nothing more to long after. My father and 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 191 

mother tell me how happy they are, and how 
dearly they love me. 

" It makes me so vexed when the servant 
comes in with the candles, for it seems as if I 
had suddenly fallen down from a great height, 
and the earth had struck me a violent blow. 
I feel dazed, and have to bethink myself where 
I am. I feel so weak and poor, and every- 
thing around me appears wearisome. Do you 
understand me, Otto ?" 

Yes ; I understood her well enough. They 
were downright foolish dreams. These even- 
ing hours did her no good : but of course I did 
not say so. 

Another evening as we were sitting to- 
gether she suddenly asked me : 

" Otto, what is it necessary to have to make 
one happy ?" 

The question took me by surprise, but I 
qijickly recovered my composure, and an- 
swered in a prosaic manner : 

" A pious heart, good health, a good estab- 
lishment where there is no want; finally, a 
choice of pleasures, and some nice people to 
love one." 

"I have all this and more; am I happy 
then?" 

" Yes ; are you not, dear Lili ?" I asked in 
astonishment. 



192 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

u I do not know," she answered, thought- 
fully. " I want something, if I could only say 
it out. I am of no use or joy to any one in 
the whole world." 

" How can you talk so ? Are you not a joy 
to mother and to me ? And as for the rest, of 
what use can a little girl like you be in the 
world ? She should be diligent ; should grow 
up and learn to be good and religious, so as 
to be able to be of use some day, and to fulfil 
her destination. But, as I said, are you not a 
great joy to me and my mother ?" 

"You do not stand in need of me; but 
there are so many who do stand in need." 

" And so do we, Lili ; every one stands in 
need of love." 

Lili quietly shook her head. 

" What can I be to either of you, Otto ? 
She is your mother, and you her son. But 
what am I ? In truth I belong to nobody. 
You found me, and took me in, and that 
is all." 

" What are you ? First and foremost, you 
are my dear little friend, whom I would not 
part with for a kingdom, are you not ?" 

"Little friend? Yes; what is that?" she 
added, after a short reverie. 

" Shall I tell what a little friend is ? She 
is a dear, tender little being that has given 



LETTERS PROM HELL* 193 

one, not her heart alone, but her life ; who 
wishes for nothing more than to bear all one's 
sorrows ; who can make one smile in trouble, 
and at other times can almost make one weep 
for joy. Yes ; a little friend is the greatest 
treasure to be found on earth." 

Lili looked at me in amazement. 

** I do not quite understand you," she said. 

" Never mind ; some time or other you will. 
But directly I ask you, will you be my sweet 
little friend ?" 

She reflected a moment, and then raising 
her pretty head, looked earnestly into my eye, 
and said firmly : " Yes ; I will be your little 
friend ; I shall be something then !" 

*' Yes — more than you are aware of, Lili," I 
answered. 

Thenceforth there was a/ precious little 
secret between us. Often arid often when I 
passed by her, or when I went out, I would 
whisper, "My own dear little friend!" and she 
would smile at me with such an angelic smile, 
as she whispered back in return, 

" And my friend too." 

How delightful it was to sit by her side thus 
in the quiet evening hours, stroking her silky 
hair, or playing with her luxuriant curls, or 
holding her little hand in mine. But — shall 
I own it ? — I felt a kind of jealousy when, as 

vol. i. o 



194 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

it often happened, she would fall into a reverie, 
in which probably I played no part. 

One evening — it is quite wonderful with 
what accuracy I can recall everything, every 
word, aye, every look — one evening I asked her, 
" Do you really love me, Lili ?" The very ques- 
tion which lovers delight in asking each other. 

" Do I love you, Otto ? What else could I 
do ? I have neither father nor mother ; there 
is none to care for me in the wide world but 
you and aunt. Should I not, then, love you 
with all my heart and soul ?" 

" I know that, lili ; but could you not learn 
to love me still more than you do now ?" 

" Perhaps !" she answered, thoughtfully. 

She was but eleven or twelve years old then. 
At that age children give free vent to their 
thoughts ; and so could Lili at times, like a 
true child that she was ; but her conversation 
was very different from that of other children. 
Not only was she thoughtful, but I may say 
profound, in her answers. Her words, there- 
fore, had an extraordinary weight, and there 
was a sincerity about them that went straight 
to the heart. 

" Perhaps !" she repeated, and fell into a 
reverie. " What shall I do, then, for you to 
love me more ? You see, Otto, I have no father 
or mother ; but God's word teaches me that I 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 195 

liave brothers and sisters without number. Yes 
; . . but I do not know them ; and they do not 
know me. I am but a child, in whom no one 
places confidence, and who can do so very little 
in the world. But you, Otto, you have power 
and opportunities, and you go far about. 
Will you, then, make me a promise ? — When- 
ever you find any of my poor brothers and 
sisters in suffering, take compassion on them, 
and be kind to them for God's sake and for 
mine. Or if you will be truly dear, go out of 
your way to find them ; and when able, take 
me with you, that we may visit them together, 
and speak kindly to them, and comfort them 
as well as we are able. I have thought long 
about it ; but I did not know till now how to 
get it out. . . . Will you promise me that? 
Only promise it, and you shall be my dearest 
friend on earth !" 

The tears had welled up into my eyes. It 
was my turn to be thoughtful now. 

€i If I do what you wish, Lili, will you love 
me much, much more than you do now ?" 

" Otto ! I cannot tell you how much !" 

" Then I will promise you on my sacred 
word. But you, my darling little sister, must 
be happy ; and not think so much about such 
sorrowful things. Now look at me, and let 
me see how happy you can look." 



196 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

And she looked up at me, and smiled with 
an expression of such transcendent joy beam- 
ing in her face, as if I had given her the 
whole kingdom of earth, and of heaven too. 

Do you not, then, plainly see that I was in 
a fair way to become a good man — or let me 
say a man — in my intercourse with this child ? 
And though at first the motive that attached 
me to her was a vain, yes, an unworthy 
one ; still so great is the power of holiness 
and of goodness in the world, even in a poor 
weak child, that I was on the point of yielding 
to its hallowed influence. I actually did see 
after Lili's poor brothers and sisters. From 
that time it was my great object to be able to 
exercise compassion. There was no need to 
do violence to my nature ; for by nature, I 
dare venture to say, I was good-hearted and 
well-disposed. Not only did I do what good 
I could at Lili's bidding, but actually found a 
pleasure in doing it. 

And so we used to sit together of an even- 
ing, chatting confidentially to each other. I 
would tell her what I had been able to do for 
this one, or for that ; draw a picture of the 
wants and necessities of the poor creatures, 
and describe the way in which I had relieved 
them, and their joy and gratitude, Oh ! how 
ner face would brighten up ! Sometimes, too, 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 197 

I would take her with me into the abodes of 
misery, and find delight in putting myself 
entirely at her disposal. It was truly wonderful 
how well she knew how to do the right thing. 

But — need I say it ? — I did not become a 
better man for all this. The spirit, indeed, 
was put in motion, and had taken a little por- 
tion of the heart into its service ; but the flesh 
was too strong. It was but a transient excite- 
ment. The world held me too completely in 
its power. What Lili had educed in me, 
became merely a little pastime with good 
intentions, and no more. 

When we parted, and I was travelling in 
foreign countries, I still took upon myself to 
see after the unhappy for Lili's sake. But it 
was merely a kind of idolatrous homage to a 
precious recollection ; a recollection of her, 
the sweet little creature, who one day would 
be mine, aye, was rqine already. But how 
ever could I have filled up my letters to her 
had I not done so ? I knew that nothing 
would captivate her so much. I deceived her, 
perhaps deceived myself too ; but God cannot 
be deceived. 

One day I found her in tears. She was sit- 
ting with her hands folded across her bosom ; 
one by one the pearly drops trickled down 
her cheeks. Her Bible lay open before her. 



198 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

" Dearest Iili, what is amiss ?" I exclaimed. 
" Why are you so sad ?" 

She raised her eyes. They beamed through 
her tears. Drying them hastily she answered : 

"lam not sad, dear Otto V 9 

" But you are crying ?" 

u Not from sorrow, but from joy," she said, 
pointing with her finger to the open Bible. 
" Se ewhat I have found !" 

I bent down over the book and read from 
the Psalms : 

" When my father and my mother forsake 
me : the Lord taketh me up." 

I did not know what to say, but stood re- 
garding her with a variety of thoughts run- 
ning through my heart. I felt moved ; what 
else could I be ? But, on the other hand, I 
liked this Bible reading just as little as if she 
were constantly pining after her parents, when 
she had me and my mother. But I did not 
deem it advisable to allude to these topics. 

I therefore let it pass; merely saying, 
" Yes, they are beautiful words, and seem as 
if they were expressly written for you, Lili. 
But you must not cry; no, not even from 
joy. . . Come, be cheerful once more ; I shall 
be back in a quarter of an hour, and then we 
will go out together." 

When I returned she was quite cheerful and 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 199 

happy after her old quiet way ; her heart and 
spirit beaming forth in turns. 

But those words, "The Lord hath taken 
me up," were engraven in her heart from that 
day forth ; and she neither would nor coifid 
conceal it. They even gave me food for re- 
flection ; but it was a mere passing thought, 
and they quickly vanished. 

Moods like these were not good for her, and 
I took all possible pains to divert her thoughts. 
But Nature understood best how to help her- 
self. By degrees she grew out of them, and 
became stouter-hearted and more cheerful. 
She was simply a thoughtful warm-hearted 
child, whose feelings and fancies, naturally 
lively and excitable, had found a rich nou- 
rishment from her lonely and -desolate con- 
dition. And she was a Creole ; not merely an 
orphan, but without a country ; a flower in 
a strange soil, where it must grow as best it 
could. 



200 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Amusement ! It is one of the standing coun- 
tersigns of the world. And yet there is no- 
thing intrinsically evil in it. A fool and an 
idiot he who lets the fountain of pleasure well 
up in vain. But to think only of amusement 
in a life that is so serious and has suoh great 
claims ; in which there is so much to be done ; 
which is so full of need and want, is an ab- 
solute evil ; and to this the world seems to 
have come. 

" How shall I amuse myself?" is a question 
that daily goes the round of the world, in hun- 
dreds and thousands of rings. The world may 
forget to pray for its daily bread ; but to pray 
after a fashion for its amusement, it never for- 
gets that. Amusement before everything is 
its morning and evening prayer. People will 
amuse themselves, even though there be not a 
crust of bread in tfie cupboard, nor a shirt to 
the back; — yes, though father and mother 
should be lying on their bier. People will 



^ 



LETTEKS FROM HELL. 201 

amuse themselves, how ever sad, how ever de- 
pressing their circumstances ; aye, even under 
the greatest calamities, — such as failure of 
crops, pestilence, bankruptcy, civil oppression, 
or the destitution and destruction of their 
fatherland ! Yes, it is a matter of experience, 
that just in such critical times as any of these, 
there are more amusements, more dissipations, 
to be found in large towns than at any other 
period. 

It has not always been so. Even fifty years 
ago it was very different. At that time work 
was the main object people lived for. Still, even 
then they would amuse themselves ; it is a na- 
tural consequence, and follows as a matter of 
course. But they were content with a moderate 
diversion as the wages of their work. Now, in- 
deed, it has become the one aim and end of life ! 

Yes, only fifty years ago ! The hankering 
after amusement has growji with prodigious 
rapidity and strength. It is a frightful 
moral epidemic that has visited the world; 
a sickness abounding with wild fantasies, 
bordering on the very threshold of madness. 
It bodes ill ! When games and theatres 
became the main, the vital object of Greece 
and Rome, those nations were near their 
downfall ; and the same phenomenon will be 
repeated. What will the end of it be ? What 



202 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

the end will be in the world, I know not ; but 
there is an end here in Hell, that is certain. 
Those fickle-minded, vain crowds, who only 
seek after amusements, have but one thing 
left when all worldly amusements fail — the 
torments of Hell ! 

Yet, let me not mislead you : if anywhere 
amusement is sought after, it is here, but, of 
course, in a distorted way. What was a sin 
in the world, here becomes a torment. How 
ever extensive the places of amusement in the 
world, they cannot be compared to what is 
to be found here. 

We have, therefore, our Tivoli : give it any 
other name if you please, it is all one : for 
as the place itself comprehends all kinds of 
senseless amusements, so does it include every 
foolish name connected with it. 

When the newspapers announce, with a 
loud trumpeting, that Tivoli, or Valhalla, or At 
hambra, or Elysium, have been visited by ten, 
twelve, or fifteen thousand persons; what is 
that? In our Valhalla they stream in by 
hundreds of millions daily. Evidently, there- 
fore, all the juggleries of the world, all its 
follies, its glittering shows, are congregated 
here ; and what is more, all evil vices and 
passions are let loose, like so many wild beasts 
within the bars of their dens. Merrily, wildly 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 203 

it goes on ; desperately merrily ! You cannot 
tell whether you are on your head or your 
heels; whether you are yourself or another 
person ; whether you are alive or dead : you 
are torn along, tossed about. Aye, it is terri- 
ble merriment, and yet quite, quite noiseless. 
' On emerging from it you are so bewildered, 
so spent ; as weak, as if you had been inces- 
santly purged for a fortnight; so weary, so 
disgusted with yourself and everything else, 
so broken doWn and exhausted in mind, as if 
you had suffered from all the fatigues of ennui 
for a year and a day. But none the less can 
you help partaking in it again, whether you 
will or no, and again straining every nerve, 
again be bewildered, and confused without a 
shadow of enjoyment or satisfaction. Our 
Tivoli,then,is a kind of prison-house, calculated 
to prosecute amusement, pleasure, frivolity, and 
wantonness ; and it fully succeeds. How those 
souls that formerly shunned work now pine 
for a little employment ! Even the meanest, 
most ignominious labour, — aye, even slave 
labour, — they would deem the greatest boon. 

But the night has come when no work can 
be done. 

I often ask myself many questions, and this 
especially among the number, 

" Have you really ever loved ?" And I have 



204 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

arrived at the mournful result that I never 
knew what love was. My childhood cannot be 
taken into account here ; for the feelings of 
childhood are as undefined as they are sincere. 
It only refers, therefore, to a riper age. And 
here, in the first place, a mark must be placed 
against everything that was merely lust and 
passion ; and next against everything that was 
only pure selfishness : so that there is but little 
left. At the very most, there can only be 
mention made of my love to my mother, to Lili, 
and to Martin. 

My mother ! Yes, undoubtedly I loved her. 
I love her still. I admired her with all my 
soul. Not without good reason did I look up 
to her as an exception to the world, as a pat* 
tern to her sex, as a model of perfection. She 
never did what was wrong; no word ever 
escaped her lips which she had cause to repent. 
No one could ever accuse her of any derelic- 
tion of duty, of any breach of decorum. Reli- 
gious and good, she ever had the fear of Grod 
and of man steadfastly before her eyes. 

Yes, I loved her ! But to speak honestly 
there was a coldness in my love, a certain 
lacking of spirit and of warmth. It cannot be 
ascribed to selfishness alone, which even in 
this connection was the fundamental principle 
of my affection. Doubtless it had its origin in 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 205 

that authority she held over me from my ear- 
liest to my latest days. And this control she 
swayed perfectly. Duty, right, decorum, to 
Which she could ever refer, were like so many 
stakes in my flesh, by which she could transfix 
me to any spot she wished. Certainly, it was 
but a moral power, and so far a legitimate 
one ; but there was something suffocating, 
almost killing about it. 

Better had she referred everything to love. 
But her affection to me, great though it was, 
had, I fear, the same failing as mine ; there 
was a coldness in it, something clammy about 
it. I cannot express it differently. And after 
all I dare not scrutinize her motives, as I 
would aught else. Enough that she was my 
mother ; though there certainly is some doubt 
whether self-love did not constitute the princi- 
pal ingredient of her love. I have too good 
reason to suppose so when I look at myself. 

And then, my love to Lili ! 

Nay, it was not mere passion, nor was it mere 
selfishness. No, no, I say, far from it. There 
was really a heart in my affection. I would 
willingly have gone through fire and water for 
her. It was not, therefore, sensual love that 
was the cause of my attachment to her. And, 
indeed, I gave up a great deal for her sake. Not 
only did I control myself, but I denied myself 



206 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

many things on her account. Still it must be 
allowed I did so with an eye to the reward I 
hoped to reap. I was like a man whose mouth 
waters after a fruit, but who lets it remain 
on the stalk till it is perfectly ripe. 

But still I can with perfect truth speak of 
my love to Lili. It was her spirit that held me 
fest and controlled me. She could have made 
me anything she pleased— -even a good and re- 
ligious man. It was not her fault I did not be- 
come one. For there was a something essential 
wanting in my love to her. There was plenty 
of flame ; but light — ah ! light was wanting. 

And lastly, Martin ! 

I loved him too. There was at least a fourth 
part of real good in my affection to him ; the 
other three I allow were made up of self-love. 
I loved him especially, because I had succeeded 
in making him the exact counterpart of my- 
self; because he grew up to be me over again. I 
loved him as my own creation, over which I had 
absolute control. Therefore I pressed him one 
moment to my heart, and the next spurned him 
under foot. But I will not talk any more about 
it ; I am ashamed of it. . . . Ah ! if I could 
only escape by feeling ashamed ! 

What then did I lack ? Why could I not 
love like other men, with a genuine love ? 

It is no longer a secret to me ! 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 20T 

God's love had not yet dawned upon me: 
God's love manifested in the fulness of time. 
Truly, one can only love with the love of 
God. True love is ever divine. In God it 
has its source ; in Him its goal. Only in God 
is love able to deny itself, to suffer, to hope, 
and to endure until death. 

There is a tradition current in the kingdom 
of Death about God's Son, who once preached 
in Hell, and released the prisoners, and filled 
up the abyss between the place of torment and 
Paradise. Then it was light in Hell ; still the 
greater number were hardened, and relapsed 
into darkness. 

An ardent longing seized me to speak with 
some one who had heard God's Son preach. 
It was foolish, I allow. In torment every im- 
pulse, be it good or evil, must end in vanity. 
We are perfectly aware of it, and yet ex- 
perience makes us no wiser. We begin over 
and over again to meditate, to desire, to con- 
ceive, and strain every nerve to clothe our 
thoughts in reality. 

I found people, it is true, who had heard 
that Divine sermon, but naturally only the 
lost. Lost people are not a people* If they 
had only retained a single word of the 
Saviour's discourse they would not now be 



208 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

in torment. The absurdity is palpable. I 
got one or two of them to speak, but it was 
all a medley of nonsense and of blasphemy ; so 
at last I was obliged to relinquish my desire. 

But still I ventured out on a longer excursion 
through Hell. I say ventured, for it really 
does require an amount of courage to throw 
one's self thus among the herd. This serpentine 
swarm — I do not know that I can use a better 
expression — is in truth frightful, even for one 
who has nothing to fear, and nothing to lose. 

You must not expect any detailed description 
of what I saw and experienced ; it would carry 
me to too great a length. For of what interest 
would it be to you to be conducted through these 
swarming motley crowds of thieves, murderers, 
cheats, and liars, forgers, and of the numbers 
who have cursed themselves into Hell; of wicked 
children and bad parents; wicked husbands 
and wives, who cannot get rid of each other; 
of sinners against nature of all kinds ; hypo- 
crites, false witnesses, adulterers, traitors, &c. ? 

But stop ! It is too ludicrous a spectacle. 
Who are those queer-looking fellows? Tur- 
key-cocks under human forms. These are 
the arrogant, the haughty. They belong to 
the scum of Hell, and are always to be found 
in a swarm. Everybody takes delight in 
kicking them out. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 209 

And those wretched women, with those 
wild, languishing glances, with those deep, 
longing sighs; what do they remind me of? 

Of a hen who has lost her chicks. In vain 
she clucks and spreads her wings. Lost is lost ! 
These are wicked mothers, doomed to long 
after their poor, neglected, ill-used children. 

But who are those strange persons that 
seem to be constituted of a melting nature, 
with soft hearts melting with sympathy? 
They go about in crowds, offering their help 
and assistance. With puling manners they 
rub up against every one, and stick fast where 
they can. 

These are the merciless. Once their- hearts 
were too hard; now they are too soft. One 
keeps all these adhesive sort of people as far 
as one can away. There is no one now who 
wants them. 

Sundry forms and scenes shall now, as if 
spontaneously, spring into existence under my 
pen. With that you must be content. 

I would cross the dark river. But when I 
came to the ferry I found a lake or rather a 
morass before me instead of a river. The 
stream had suddenly overflowed its banks, and 
had thrown its putrid, slimy mire far and wide. 
The stench was enough to suffocate one. The 

VOL. I. p 



210 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

cause of this fearful flood soon became generally 
known when we got a copy of the well-known 
* Missionary Intelligencer," in which the start- 
ling progress Christianity had made in China, 
Japan, and India, was blazoned forth to the 
world. One bouncing falsehood like this is 
quite enough to make the river rise and over- 
flow its banks. Do not misunderstand me. I 
have nothing to say against a true missionary 
spirit, which humble in heart performs its work 
in quietness. But there is another, a counter- 
feit one, which the world has taken by the 
hand. This is it which makes use of trumpets. 
The world is and remains only a charlatan. 

There was a large concourse of people as- 
sembled at the ferry. Some evidently, like my- 
self, wished to cross over, but determined to wait 
till the waters had subsided. But the greater 
number had come on account of the mud. 

You must have heard the street boys in the 
world calling out, " Look at the mud ! " We 
say the same here. What is interesting before 
everything ? In the world it only needs a gutter 
to run over to collect a crowd. How then about 
a river running over, and that the black river ? 
Do not hold your nose. It was just the stench 
that brought all these people together. 

As I would not wait, and as I neither shared 
in the prevailing taste for the interesting, I 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 211 

went higher up the stream. It was indifferent 
to me where I crossed over. Higher up, the 
river ran in a deep channel, and there were 
but few traces of the flood visible. Both banks 
were thickly studded with villas in every con- 
ceivable style. In Hell fabulous buildings are 
everywhere the order of the day. It is so easy 
to give one's imagination free scope, and here 
it is the only thing to be done. Let us but 
imagine a thing, and, how ever bad it be, it 
immediately exists. Meanwhile it does not take 
place without entailing suffering ; for it is im- 
possible to tell how this straining of the imagi- 
native powers harasses and enervates the soul. 

But these country seats and places of amuse- 
ment on the banks of the black river are the 
most romantic I have ever seen. I began to 

think of the river. Were these villas 

on the slimy, stinking banks an imitation of 

those on the river ? If they were, then 

I must say they were a very bad imitation. 
Buildings, gardens, statues — all can be con- 
jured forth; but the situation by the river 
does not apparently enhance the beauty of the 
scene. 

I passed through several towns, large and 
small. Wonderful enough, the black river, 
like the rivers in the world, exercises a certain 
attractive power. Its banks are more thickly 




212 LETTERS FROM HELL. " 

populated than any other part of Hell. And 
yet there are long, waste extents. Perhaps it 
is only imagination, hut the desolateness of the 
place seemed more fearful than anywhere else. 
And yet — who can account for a human soul ? 
— I remained here much longer than I needed 
to have done. 

I was sitting musing over my evil plight on 
a low rocky ledge overhanging the river, whose 
sluggish putrid waters rolled lazily on under 
my feet. The old fables about the river Lethe 
came into my mind. Alas ! mere fables ! There 
is no oblivion after death. If there were such 
a river from whose waters one could quaff a 
draught of oblivion, there would then be no 
place of torment in Hell. Consciousness, 
memory, these are our bitter torments. In the 
world there used to be a momentary, a partial 
forgetfulness of self. Nothing like it exists here. 

I fancied I heard some one groan. I rose 
to ray feet, and a strange sight met my eye. 
He was a man of stately form ; not so his 
posture. For he was squatting down by the 
water washing his hands. They were covered 
with blood ; but the more he washed them, the 
more bloody did they become, so that when he 
held them up out of the water, the great drops 
fell off them. It was horrible ! 

He knew very well that I was behind him, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 213 

for all at once he turned round without further 
introduction, and asked me the question, 
« What is truth ?" 

I started, and for a moment was unable to 
utter a word in reply. Strange questions 
like that cannot, at all events, be answered in 
an off-hand way. With an impatient expres- 
sion on his face and in his voice he again 
asked, 

"What is truth?" 

I replied, " It is a truth that it is too late 
to inquire what truth is here ! " 

But the answer did not seem to satisfy him, 
for he shook his head and turned away, and 
again began eagerly to wash his bloody 
hands. 

I tried to get him into conversation, but it 
was useless. I could not doubt, therefore, but 
that here was one of those wretched beings 
before me, who once had stood face to face 
with the Son of God, had conversed with Him, 
and had had His life in their hands. I burned 
with eagerness to get him to speak ; but all my 
pains were thrown away. So at last I left him. 

Who could it be ? It scarcely needed one 
look at the long robe with the purple border, 
and the ring on the finger, to feel certain that 
it was none other but Pontius Pilate, once the 
Roman governor of Judea ! 



214 LETTERS FROM BELL, 

When he has not anything to do in the 
Jewish capital he is always to be found crouch- 
ing down by the river side washing his hands. 
And when any one passes by him, he turns 
round and asks, " What is truth ? " And every- 
body is obliged to give him an answer to his 
question. But he ever shakes his head ; no one 
can tell him. For the question does not refer to 
truth in the concrete, but to abstract, absolute 
truth. Nobody knows anything about it here. 

Do you not see the striking anomaly ? Pilate 
asking about truth, while he is washing his 
hands in the mire and mud of falsehood. 

I crossed over and passed through desert 
tracts ; I mean uninhabited tracts, but not 
un-betra veiled ones. There is not a spot in 
Hell, how ever wild and desolate it be, that is 
not well traversed. Some spirits, indeed, seem 
to seek just these very places. 

Here the wild hunter is to be found, not 
only the hunter of popular tradition, but num- 
berless others. Countless are they who, in 
different ways, pass their whole lifetime in 
hunting after a miserable bit of meat, or after 
a still less worthy object — after a phantom, an 
idea, or even after nothing at all, but merely 
for the pleasure of moving quickly. Before 
they are aware they stumble into their graves, 
and find themselves in Hell's torments. 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 215 

Here, too, those who cherish all kinds of 
sinister, misanthropical notions, or have com- 
mitted crimes against which all human nature, 
evil or good, revolts, may be seen stealing 
along. Loneliness is a necessity to them. 
Were there a solitary place, no matter how 
frightful it might be, many would flee thither 
to shun contact with their fellows. 

There is one of these forms which, once 
seen, is never forgotten. He is of a gigantic 
and towering stature, half naked, clad only in 
the skin of some wild beast. A thick, tangled 
mass of hair covers his head and hangs down 
over his eyes. There is a wild, glowering, 
and scowling look about him. On his fore- 
head there is a fearful brand. He carries a 
huge club in his hand, not, however, for self- 
defence, for he is continually on the flight, 
fearful lest any one should kill him. Every 
one who meets this frightful apparition cannot 
repress a shudder. Still he flees from the weak- 
est and smallest ; always flying, ever alone. It 
is one of the greatest rarities ever to see him 
in company with any one. Nowhere and yet 
everywhere — an exile on earth, an exile in Hell. 

It is Cain ! 

I hurried away, and as he did the same we 
were soon out of each other's sight. 

Here, then, I had met one who was even 



216 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

more wretched than myself. A murderer, a 
fratricide; and I was not an outlaw among 
the outlawed. But I did not derive any per- 
sonal consolation from the fact. My funeral 
sermon, unhappy recollection, was too firmly 
engraven on my memory for that. There is 
nothing more calculated to mortify egotistical 
feelings than a sermon such as mine was. But 
I have forgotten to tell you about it. 

In the very first town I came to by the 
river, I almost stumbled over my own funeral 
sermon. I fell into the hands of an old ballad 
woman, once a Prima Donna and Improvi- 
satrice, who would let me have no peace till I 
had seen some of her "bran new" songs. 

Whether she knew me I cannot say. But 
amongst her collection I found, and started 
back just as if some one had given me a 
violent blow on the head, a song bearing the 
following title : — 

"A BEAK NEW AM) MOTJEHFUL DITTY 

ABOUT MR. OTTO N. -primus inter pares, 

Who had paid for the best Hearse And best Parson 

IN ORDER TO GET INTO PARADISE, 

BUT WENT TO HELL. 

Motto (his Reverence's own tvords) : • We shall meet again' " 

My funeral sermon, here in Hell ; and in 
verse too ! 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 217 

I ground my teeth and began to read. 

First, there was a fulsome laudation over 
my virtues, especially those which I never 
possessed, and a corresponding estimate of the 
loss society had undergone by my death. A 
feeling of nausea came over me. Thereupon 
the sermon went on to sketch the blessed state 
into which I had now entered, as a reward 
for my labours ; dwelling on the joy, the 
peace, and splendour which henceforth were 
evermore my lot. 

What cutting, cruel irony ! 

It seemed as if my heart was pierced by a 
hundred knives. It was more than I could 
endure. I flung the trashy- thing from me, 
and rushed away gnashing my teeth with 
anguish. A long time elapsed before I reco- 
vered from the effects of this infernal dose. 
But never shall I be able to obliterate from 
my mind the recollection of the miserable 

wretch that his Reverence, Mr. , held 

such a brazen-tongued funeral sermon over. 
- Oh, what a good, pious fool, or else hypo- 
crite, you must be ! As if a man needed only 
to die to become a spirit in Heaven ! . . . But 

yet 1 will not repeat the hope and wish to 

which you gave utterance. You knew not 
what you were saying, 

" We shall meet again !" 



218 LETTERS FROM HELL. 



CHAPTER XII. 

On this excursion I saw a king for the first 
time in Hell; a piteous sight! No greater 
contrast between the past and the present — 
the then and the thereafter — can be conceived. 

Princes, kings, emperors, &c, occupy the 
most miserable of all positions in Hell ! 

Civil distinctions reckon as naught here. 
There is no connecting link between souls, 
saving the instinctive feeling of sociability, 
and the customs they have brought down with 
them from the upper world. Everything 
is jumbled one among another in endless con- 
fusion. No restrictions, no formalities, are 
recognised ; no kingdoms, no constitutions, no 
ordinances are acknowledged. Hence it may 
be readily perceived that princes are a super- 
fluity. Certainly their rank authorizes them 
to occupy a prominent position, at all events, 
in polite society. For everybody bows to 
rank here as of old. But they are too cast 
down, too miserable, to assert their rights ; so 
they timidly keep in the background. They 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 219 

are like images of saints from which the 
gilded surface has been worn off, and which 
have been thrown into the kennel, where 
darkness and filth reign supreme. Their 
greatness was merely conventional ; in other 
words, the gilt was not pure gold ; and now 
it is gone, leaving not a trace of majesty or 
of nobility behind. 

Here they have no kingdom to experimen- 
talize on ; no people to tyrannize over ; no 
finances to fritter away. They live and 
breathe merely in the mournful recollection 
of a power and a magnificence that have 
vanished. Out of all their numerous and 
glittering retinue, only one or two cringing 
courtiers remain, whom deep-rooted habit, not 
gratitude, binds to their person. I said they 
were bowed down. Aye, it is quite true ; true 
to the letter. They are well-nigh sinking under 
the weight of the crown on their heads. 

What does such a crown weigh ? Answer 
me first another question — " How great is a 
monarch's responsibility in the world ?" 

Heavy are these crowns ; hundreds of 
pounds in weight ! Generally these exalted 
personages get a couple of their yeomen to 
support them under either arm, and as they 
thus shuffle piteously along, they present, 
need I add, a sorry pageant. 



220 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

But worse still does it fare with those 
potentates who were styled " The Great " in 
the world. Ah ! how little, how wretchedly- 
little, are they now! In addition to the 
weight of their crowns, this unhappy sirname 
has superimposed an enormous extra weight, 
which well-nigh crushes them to the earth. 
Only with tottering knees, and additional 
help, are they able to drag themselves along, 
groaning piteously all the while. 

Genuine great princes are naturally not 
found here. Those others the world sirnamed 
" The Great," either because they were cruel 
butchers, who had treacherously shed the blood 
of thousands of their fellow-creatures, and de- 
stroyed the happiness of twenty times as many 
others ; or because they had distinguished them- 
selves by a crafty, shameful policy, which broke 
through all the restraints of morality, and set at 
naught all humanity. Others were sirnamed 
" The Great" without any assignable reason. 
Circumstances proved favourable, and they 
were well served. Poor bunglers themselves, 
they were in general the maddest of all, and 
wished to have divine honours shown them. 
So they, too, had to go to Hell ! 

Oh ! how far better would all these kings 
have acted, had they striven to earn for them- 
selves the title "Much Beloved," instead of 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 221 

that other, " The Great ! " Love would have 
cloked over a multitude of their sins. Now 
their sighs and moans are vain. The utter 
hopelessness of the place of torment cannot be 
better expressed than in the following words ; 
" Here love exists no more." 

Never have I heard such sighs as those 
which proceed from these princes, kings, and 
emperors. It is a rarity to hear them speak ; 
they only sigh. A sigh expresses all they 
would say. In every sigh one would suppose 
they must gasp their last. 

It is easy to understand, then, that they are 
not a very presentable sort of people; and 
that they are shy, and prefer to keep them- 
selves in the background. 

One seldom meets any of them on a high- 
road. They could not get on there. For they 
are persecuted by all those whose prosperity 
they have destroyed, just as a hawk is pursued 
by tribes of small birds. They are exposed to 
blow after blow, and by flight they cannot 
save themselves. So they keep mostly to 
desert places, principally in the neighbourhood 
of the City of Unrighteousness, where the only 
prospect of a kingdom or a principality is open 
to them. x 

To this same class also belong the pre- 
tenders. Anything more starved looking, 



222 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

more utterly miserable, and, at the same time, 
more rapacious than these pretenders cannot 
be imagined. They resemble famishing wolves, 
which prowl about singly, full of the expec- 
tation of finding a rich, fat prey. But fat 
baits are rare even in the best parts of the 
world ! 

Unhappy kings, so miserable in themselves, 
and so persecuted into the bargain, the ner- 
vousness from which they suffer is still almost 
their worst suffering! Suddenly a terrible 
shout is heard : " A Pretender, a Pretender !" 
and the courtiers instinctively crowd around 
their king and master. A battle ensues, as 
ridiculous as it is horrible. But understand 
me, nothing is really laughable in Hell ; it is 
grievous altogether. With savage impotence 
the pretender dashes through the throng to 
tear the crown from off the king's head. The 
wretched man cannot even defend himself; he 
is too abject, too bowed down. But his guards 
do not desert him ; they fight as if for dear 
life. Bravely they fence, something like a 
hare with her fore-paws ; and the pretender is 
hurled back with ignominy, and has to slink 
off without the crown. 

Thus you will see that if there is anything 
even still more miserable than kings, it is the 
pretenders. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 223 

And how happy many of these wretched 
beings might have been ! What an enviable 
life they might have led ! Fortune had blessed 
them from their birth in preference to millions. 
They possessed what in common parlance is 
termed wealth; they had exalted rank, and 
were amongst the respected and the honoured. 
But they could not be content with such a dis- 
tinguished private life. They were seized 
with the delirium of ambition ; a crown they 
must obtain. And to obtain it they plunged 
headlong into a course of life, in which they 
must needs lose all self-respect, and risk their 
fortune and their peace into the bargain. 
They must stoop to the most unworthy machi- 
nations, associate on the most intimate terms 
with the lowest of the low ; and finally have 
the blood of thousands resting on their heads. 

Naturally their so-called " divine right" was 
ever on their lips ; and thus they strove to 
make themselves and others believe that it 
was in the service of righteousness they sacri- 
ficed themselves, and everything else besides. 
But this " divine right" was perhaps but the 
fabrication of a lying imaginative power, & 
reckaufee of old scandalous falsehoods, with a 
spice of new ones according to taste* At 
all events it would have been far better for 
them had they wrongfully encountered a happy 



224 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

end, than with right on their side have entered 
upon the torments of Hell. 

I spoke of human butchers ! But it is not 
necessary to be either a king or an emperor 
to be a human butcher. Some of the greatest 
butchers the world has ever known have been 
ministers, governors, generals, &c, &c. 

Here in Hell they continue their bloody 
career. I am thinking especially of the 
generals now. In the world, battles and 
slaughter constituted their pastime and their 
joy. Here the joy of course is gone, but the 
pastime remains. There is no lack of ad- 
herents to these notable leaders. They have . 
a superfluous influx of all those whose pursuits 
were war and blood-shedding in contradistino- 
tion to that peace and love which God has 
had proclaimed to the world ; not to speak of 
the countless herd that is without a master, 
and which congregates wherever an individual 
is seen towering above the mass, or wherever 
the sound of a trumpet or a drum is heard. 

On the wide desert plains the armies set 
themselves in array, hundreds of thousands 
against hundreds of thousands. A battle is 
fought ! With banners waving aloft, though 
with chattering teeth, they advance against 
each other. Empty game! The cannons 
belch out their smoke, but no report follows. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 225 

The stalwart columns press onwards. One 
would think a terrible crash must ensue ; but 
all passes off in perfect silence. For no en- 
counter really takes place. Instead of tramp- 
ling on his foe, each man runs through him. 
It is indescribably stupid ! No result, no 
victory is possible ; nay, it is even an impossi- 
bility to gain ever so trifling an advantage. 
But, still, after the necessary breathing time, 
the same game commences anew. Vanity of 
vanities! It must be consuming work. It is 
not the heart's blood that flows in these con- 
tests, it is the spirit which bleeds itself to death, 
and yet never dies. 

It made me think of the heroes of the Val- 
halla. But 'twas a foolish thought ; there is 
no comparison between these and them. The 
heroes of the Valhalla moved in power and in 
glory ; it is not only a real, but a perfected life 
they live, without any regrets. The heroes 
in Hell, on the contrary, are both laughable, 
and enough to make one weep ; these heroes, 
with chattering teeth, their powerless blows, 
their endless, fruitless labours! But there 
is no one who either laughs or weeps at 
them. 

I have just come from one such battle-field. 
Two renowned generals were opposed to each 
other, two of the greatest butchers recorded in 

VOL. i. Q 



226 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

history. Though servants of the same king- 
dom at different times, they are far too power- 
ful for Hell to hold them both at once. There- 
fore they live in continued enmity, and wage 
war after war against each other. But the 
result will ever be as it was just now. The 
battle was undecided. One of the generals 
rode by me on his return from the battle, dis- 
tinguishable by the long plumes in his hat, 
and by the little grey horse he rode. Coming 
up to where I was standing he halted, and I 
heard him mutter between his clenched teeth, 
* I will burn him, and his whole crew F* I 
could imagine the other general muttering in 
his beard, " 111 hang him !" 

In these remote wastes — a foolish expression 
where everything is a waste, but I have tried 
in vain to find a better one — one frequently 
stumbles on colonies of a certain mighty nation, 
which I will not mention expressly by name. 
I will blame no one. And this people by the 
side of great defects exhibit many estimable 
qualities. I never could make this remark- 
able nation out. The greatest contradictions 
seemed to be united in their character. By 
the side of bombast and the quaintest eccen- 
tricity they display the greatest solidity 
of character; with a puling sentimentality, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 227 

arrogance, and ostentation, an even, hearty 
nature ; with falsehood and treachery, an ex- 
emplary uprightness and fidelity ; and with a 
cowardly and oppressive spirit, a valiant and 
chivalrous disposition. After this definition 
you cannot fail to recognise it. 

But notwithstanding all these opposite 
qualities, it is quite certain that they have a 
wonderful gift of making themselves detested 
wherever they go. Everywhere they will 
apeak ip a lofty strain, strike the key- 
note as it were, and seek to show their au- 
thority. They seem firmly to helieve that 
they have been specially selected to civilize 
all the other nations of the world, to teach 
them what truth is, and what right is, what 
education consists in, and what morals are. 
Here they are just the same as of old. Every- 
where they are running foul of some one or 
other, stirring up strife, and making thenv 
selves hated. But patience is not so enduring 
in Hell as in the world. They are driven, 
spurned away, and have to fly. From them 
proceed these numerous colonies ; so insuffer- 
able a people is for the most part obliged to 
live alone. Hence the instinctive desire of 
emigrating and colonizing. 

I think I understand now the meaning of 
these desert tracts. It is less probable that 



228 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

the above-named people have chosen these 
places for building colonies in, than that they 
are the result of these colonies. The fact is, 
no one likes to have them for neighbours. 

There is one speciality about this nation 
worthy of notice, namely, the number of lite- 
rary notabilities it yields to Hell. I always 
knew that it was a nation of authors, and 
that there were few among its educated classes 
who had not attempted some branch or other 
of literature. But because a man j^rites, it 
is not, therefore, necessary that he should 
write himself into Hell. Still, the phenomenon 
can be explained ! 

With a large proportion, authorship is a 
kind of literary dawdling or toying, under 
which the recognition of the seriousness of life, 
little by little, falls to the ground. They live 
as good-for-nothings, as good-for-nothings they 
die; and, therefore, as a matter of course, 
come to Hell. With another large proportion 
authorship is a trade that is not only plied in 
the service of gain, but often of meanness, 
falsehood, and calumny. Naturally the result 
is the same. 

Amongst these literati journalists undoubt- 
edly occupy the foremost rank. True, there 
is this in common with the newspaper writers 
of all nations, that they are somewhat lax, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 229 

and not very particular about telling a lie 
now and then. But I fully believe that only 
in one country in the world is there to be found 
a press that has exhibited proofs of an organ- 
ized system of lying. And in its time it has 
accomplished many great and remarkable 
things. It has given powerful support to false 
pretenders, created seditions, and has even 
paved the way for conquests. Naturally it had 
to do with the small and the weak ; falsehood 
is ever cowardly. How there can be unity in 
such pursuits, and among so many, passes my 
comprehension ; and yet, perhaps, it is not so 
difficult to understand after all. In this country 
the greater number of the journalists have their 
price, and are to be bought over either by 
flattery or by gold. The bribed ones band 
together, and the rest are gradually dragged 
along with them ; it is so stupid, and withal 
so dangerous, to stand alone. 

And there is another peculiarity about this 
great nation ; now and then it is subject to a 
regular ecstasy. Now it rants about a popular 
" unification," though, not only in reality, but 
in all its ideas, it offers a spectacle of the most 
piteous disunity; now about liberty, though 
it slavishly worships and grovels in the dust 
before everything that is a little exalted ; now 
it longs for a fleet, though it is a continental 



230 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

nation, and on one side only has a very im- 
perfect access to the sea. Now it will have a 
war in the Devil's name, and perform some 
exploit or other that has never been seen before ; 
and, with this object in view, seeks out the 
weakest among its neighbours, whom it then 
distinguishes by the title of an " hereditary foe/* 

In short, when such a rapture comes over 
the nation, unity follows as a matter of course. 
All lie with one throat, and pervert every- 
thing in the most shameless manner. A thou- 
sand pens are set a scribbling along the road 
of falsehood to promote the magnificent enter- 
prise. Not only is free scope given to the 
imagination, but, with a cool and clear con- 
sciousness, palpable facts are made away with. 
If, unfortunately, there are none ip. the way, 
so much the better, they can be made ad 
libitum ; it is easy to invent a few ! 

The tendency — they call it the idea — is all 
in all to them, and, without the slightest hesi- 
tation, truth and honour are sacrificed to it. 

Impudence has been created into a power by 
these persons. Only tell lie upon lie, and it 
is sure to answer. Certainly all these lies are 
not believed at once, but some importance is 
always .attached to them; and, by daily repe- 
tition, even the most barefaced falsehoods are 
gulped down whole by the public. It then 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 231 

becomes a fact, and serves as a foundation 
whereon others can be built. 

The perseverance these people exhibit in 
their lying tendencies, is almost incredible. 
We have instances of their having lied con- 
tinuously for fifteen, twenty, or twenty-five 
years in succession, in order to carry a project 
through, which they have seen floating above 
them in the clouds. And see, the system 
triumphed ! 

Not only have they succeeded in carrying 
their own, but a large portion of mankind 
along with them. They either carried out, or 
very nearly carried out, everything they 
pleased. Over untoward events mortal man, 
of course, cannot prevail. I am not aufait in 
their method, and, therefore, am unable to say 
how many times a lie should be repeated to 
convert it into a fact ; but, certain it is, that 
it eventually does become one after constant 
repetition. 

By this time, therefore, it must be quite 
clear to you how it is that such an over- 
whelming number of the literary characters of 
this nation find their way down here. Some 
have sauntered along the road of literature, 
others have lolled into Hell. Amongst these 
last, the systematic liars are especially dis- 
tinguishable. The journalists fare the worst 



232 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

of all, in whom so great and so responsible a 
trust has been reposed. They became fat on 
lying in the world, and here they are literally 
basted in their own grease. 

As you are aware, we all suffer from a 
parching thirst ; we pine for a drop of water. 
Still it would hardly occur to us to slake our 
thirst in the slimy putrid waters of the black 
river. There are some, however, who have 
secretly tried it. So that in Hell there are 
people who are habitual tipplers. One often 
hears a person say to another, " You have 
been drinking of the river then !" For, in 
reality they cannot conceal it. The traitorous 
lying stuff streams out again from all parts 
of their body; oozes out from every pore, 
in order to return to the river. Only the 
vanishing aliquot portion of the lying liquid, 
which adheres to the tippler, remains behind 
to add fuel to another burning thirst. So 
they slink down once again to the river to 
w quaff off another dose. Thus, in a measure, 
the whole mass of water in the black river is 
gradually distilled through them. Eminent 
mathematicians have calculated that an ordi- 
nary drinker, reckoning after the earthly du- 
ration of time, would require 7213 years, 93 
days, 11 hours and 39 minutes to empty it in. 
As yet no one has completed this course ! A 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 233 

more nauseous sight than one of these tippling 
journalists presents, cannot be conceived. 
And even this is not the worst; but I will 
say no more about them. There are things of 
which one cannot speak. 

Of course there are beggars in Hell. But 
I lately chanced to stumble on some of the 
most remarkable beggars I ever saw, or rather 
they stumbled on me, and nearly succeeded in 
making an end of me. You could not pos- 
sibly guess what their importunity consisted 
in— on nothing less than to baptize me. 
They besought me in the most whining terms 
to let them baptize me ; possibly I might have 
given way, only that I had no use for that 
sort of thing. The more angry I grew, the 
more humble, but the more importunate, did 
they become. They would not take a refusal. 
That I ultimately escaped, I can only attribute 
to the fortunate circumstance that a more pro- 
mising-looking convert fell in their way. 

These beggars, the most miserable I have 
ever seen (I scarcely expect you to believe 
me), are missionaries. I do not know whether 
you have heard of the business-like way in 
which the holy missionary spirit discharges 
its office in the world. It is nothing but a 
chase after heathens ; a regular hunt after the 



234 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

little ones that have short legs, and who can- 
not defend themselves. 

In their eyes learning is a matter of se- 
condary importance ; the road it marks out is 
too laborious. Baptism is everything; and 
the only question is, to find an opportunity of 
sprinkling water over as many heads as pos- 
sible. So many heads, so many names are 
entered in the registers as converts to Chris- 
tianity; and their number is then copied 
into the Missionary Journals, in order to fill 
the Christian world with amazement and accla- 
mations of joyfulness. Of course it follows, 
as a matter of course, that the greater pro- 
portion of the baptized consists of children, 
who naturally grow up in masses without 
retaining the slightest recollection of the 
Christianity imparted to them. 

These missionaries have to wander inde- 
fatigably about, beseeching people in the most 
importunate way to be baptized, begging as if 
life itself depended on it, in a manner that is 
quite heart-breaking. In truth, it is a thou- 
sand times a greater object with them now to 
get a baptism scratched out from the register, 
than ever it was to get one entered. For 
this purpose their register-books are always at 
hand; but it is but little success they meet 
with. Some are angry and uncivil to them, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 235 

believing that they wish to taunt them ; others 
laugh and make fun of them, as if it were a 
capital joke; while others, again, turn their 
extraordinary religious fervour into ridicule. 
Enough to say that, however smoothly their 
work went on in the world, here it is just as 
great drudgery. They have to retrace their 
steps along the very same road on which they 
travelled. But it is a road without an end ! 
without a goal ! 

Si Three is a luck} 7 number," we used to say 
in the world. But it was often a lie from the 
bell of hells. No wonder, then, that this 
triple element often bothers one. Thus I 
know very well that God is a triune God, but 
to get three persons united under one head 
surpasses my powers. Do you understand? 
Tri-unity ever, as it were, falls to pieces before 
me. Further than to two persons I can never 
advance ; for when I would name the third, 
alas, he is gone ! In vain I rack my brains, 
it is as if heart and head would burst. Now 
it is God the Son ; now, God the Holy Spirit, 
that is wanting ; and now . . . yes ... I 
am very near to it . . . No ! ... it is use- 
less ... it is desperate ! 

There is also another trinity which sorely 
puzzles me. This, too, falls to pieces before 



236 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

me, but not always. Faith, hope, and love. 
Do you see ? But what is faith ? What is 
hope ? I know neither the one nor the other 
more. But what love is, I still know to my 
deep sorrow ; and yet, no ! I only know what 
it might have been. 

Oh ! that you would be warned ! you who 
still walk in the light and in hope. Love is 
not a sport, an idle joke; it is life's most 
earnest reality. If I had ever rightly under- 
stood what love was, then faith and hope 
would never have failed me. 

Oh ! be warned ! 

My heart burns for you, mostly, it is true, 
from anguish, but still from love. For you, 
my silent friend, who have not answered with 
a single word to all my letters. For you, my 
mother, though my deepest sighs ever escaped 
your ear. For you, Martin, though you are 
the cause of my unceasing torment. What do 
you want with me ? What have you to tell 
me ? For all of you, all ! Even from Hell I 
call you my brothers and sisters ! 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 237 



CHAPTER XIII. 

-I do not recollect whether I told you that it is 
really a matter of perfect indifference what 
language we speak here. All languages are 
understood equally well among us. But the 
real state of the case is, there is no language, 
consequently no speech. The articulations we 
think we give utterance to are probably but 
imaginary on our parts, as everything else is ; 
and we catch one another's meaning after a 
strange fashion, without any intermediate 
agency, which it is impossible for rae to ex- 
plain. Only one thing I know, that this 
method is so certain that we never — as was 
often the case in the world— misunderstand 
each other's meaning. 

Human nature is pretty much the same 
everywhere. In Hell, therefore, a soul may 
also stand in need of solitude. It is often quite 
refreshing to me to get out of the throng, and 
to hie away to the desert tracts in this fright- 



238 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

ful land ; and when I get quite by myself it 
seems to me as if I could breathe more freely. 
I stop still, or else sink down, to give free 
admission to thoughts which come streaming in, 
or else occupy myself in fruitless endeavours 
to come to an understanding with myself 
Need I add that this pleasure is not unaccom- 
panied by pain ; for the more conscious the 
spirit becomes the greater the pain that follows. 

But it is a rare thing to find perfect soli- 
tude, even in these desert places. Some one or 
other is sure to intrude upon one, and then I am 
obliged to divert my thoughts. This compul- 
sory companionship, however sore a trial it be 
to the patience, is frequently not unattended 
with interest, in so far, of course, as interest 
can exist heTe. 

Thus, a little while ago I was bothered with 
a German Professor of History. But in order 
not to be too personal, allow me to state, en 
passant, that German professors may be most 
estimable persons, very learned, and, withal, 
kindly and amiable. Of course, there are ex- 
ceptions. 

My Professor was one of those who could 
deduce everything possible out of history, 
that either his own inclinations, or those of 
the people, or the pleasure or whim of a 
highly esteemed prince, might deem desirable. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 239 

Thus, if a small portion of a state conceive 
the idea of separating, and of forming an in- 
dependent body by itself, they are able in the 
twinkling of an eye to discover some con- 
stitutional precedent out of the musty and 
mouldy archives to authorize rebellion. Or if 
an entire, or a half, or only a duodecimo 
prince, conceive a penchant for a particular 
parcel of territory, it is but a little matter to 
prove His Royal Highness's hereditary right 
and title to it. Nothing is impossible to their 
profound learning, when the fancy takes 
them, or gold allures them. They can change 
black into white in a twinkling, or white into 
black, and into white again, if necessary. In 
this last manipulation, indeed, their highest 
art consists. And, if the result which their 
profound investigations have discovered, and 
pronounced to be the absolute, unalterable 
truth, by some trick of fortune does not quite 
answer the expectations formed of it, without 
feeling the slightest discomposure they undo 
what they have done, and arrive at another 
result directly opposite to the former one, and 
pronounce it in turn to be every whit as abso- 
lute and unalterable a truth as the other was. 
It would be a sure sign of moral depravity 
to entertain the slightest doubt about it. 
It is such people as these that have given 



240 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

rise to that remarkable proverb, " There is a 
science in lying, as the Devil said when he 
was studying at the University of Kiel !" 

Well, we sat and conversed together in this 
lonely place. Naturally I was the one to 
receive instruction, and I gave myself up with 
apparent credulity to be crammed full of all 
kinds of lies, the like of which never were 
heard on earth. 

Presently, my attention was arrested by the 
appearance of two gigantic forms that emerged 
from out of the misty darkness, and approached 
us, with slow and measured steps, as if they 
would pass close by where we were sitting. 
They were walking arm in arm in brotherly 
confidence. But they presented a very incon- 
gruous pair. The form on the right I recognised 
instantly, even at a distance, though I had 
seen him but once before. It was Cain ! The 
other, however, though of powerful build, 
seemed quite small by the side of Cain. I did 
not know him. He was dressed in the costly 
style of the middle ages, and in comparison 
with Cain's semi-nude condition, seemed to be 
smothered in clothes. He wore an ermine 
cape over his knightly habiliments. A mas- 
sive gold chain, with a medallion attached, 
hung round his neck, and reached far down 
on his breast. Grolden spurs glittered on his 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 241 

boots, the tops of which hung loosely down. 
On his casque was a ring of gold, with pointed 
branches resembling a crown, and an enor- 
mous sword was girded round his loins. But 
though of commanding stature, and hand- 
somely attired, there was a lack of nobility 
about him. He seemed to have a difficulty in 
walking, while Cain's uneven and irregular 
gait made it still more difficult for him to keep 
pace with his companion. In truth, a more 
dissimilar pair could not well be conceived. 
And yet there were many remarkable points 
of resemblance between them. Both had the 
same nervous, scowling look. Both had their 
brand mark ; for as they passed us, I could see 
when Cain's companion raised his casque that 
the ring had left a bloody, glowing mark 
across the brow. 

I could not repress a shudder; but after 
they had passed us some little distance the 
Professor whispered to me, 

"Did you see that sharp-pointed stake 
which he had through him ?" 

I had not observed it. 

" But there is one," continued the Professor, 
" though he takes all possible pains to hide it 
with a fold of his cloak. That is yvhy he 
walks so lame." 

u Who was it ?" I inquired. 
vol. I. R 



242 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

" It was Cain and Abel." 

This answer puzzled me sorely. I got quite 
confused, and for a little while was quite 
unable to collect my thoughts. Surely Abel 
was Cain's innocent, murdered brother. Abel 
could not possibly be in the torments of Hell ! 
And still less could Cain and Abel form a pair 
in Hell ! 

At last I got my thoughts so far in order 
that I was able to ask, " What Abel T 

" Abel, King of Denmark/' was the reply : 
"died June 29, 1252." 

Now it was all clear ! 

Still I knew but little about this Abel. But 
the German Professor knew all about it, and 
did not keep his knowledge to himself. He 
told me that " Abel had been one of Denmark's 
mightiest kings, one of those great geniuses 
which appear centuries before their time, and 
who are, therefore, misunderstood and wrongly 
judged. So was Abel by the stupid Danes. 
He was the first monarch on whose mind it had 
dawned that only by German civilization and 
favour, by a political and moral dependence on 
the great and powerful Germany, could there 
be any future for Denmark. But the stupid 
Danes either could not or would not see it. 
They hated them to the death ; there was no 
accusation too base but they charged them 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 243 

with it. So at last he was forced to yield, 
and he fell as one of the first and chiefest of 
martyrs to a holy cause, — Germany's world- 
wide vocation to civilize and to ennoble all the 
nations of the world." 

" A martyr ! . . . and now in Hell? . . . and 
Cain's companion ?" I ventured to insinuate. 

But the Professor made me no answer, for a 
third person had meanwhile come up, and, 
without any ceremony, at once usurped the 
conversation. 

He was a strange-looking individual, appa- 
rently composed of two heterogeneous pieces. 
Like the mermaid in fable, he was beautiful to 
look at above, but hideous below. Looking at 
the upper part of his person he seemed clad 
as a knight partly accoutred, for he wore a 
coat of mail of the finest texture over a richly 
embroidered buff jacket, and a helmet with a 
golden ornament resembling a crown. His 
nether habiliments were, however, in little 
keeping, for they consisted merely of a pair of 
boots, of the very coarsest and most common 
description ; just like those, in fact, fishermen 
wear, with soft well-greased tops that can be 
drawn quite up over the legs. 

But without feeling at all discomposed at 
being criticised, he sat there as a man tho- 
roughly in command of his position, resting 



244 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

his hands and his chin on the hilt of his pon- 
derous sword. From underneath his bushy 
eyebrows flashed a glance which it was difficult 
to endure ; and when he began to speak he 
spoke as one who could brook no contra- 
diction. 

A repulsive, malicious smile played round 
the corners of his bearded mouth. It made 
me feel quite uncomfortable. 

" It is all a downright lie from first to last !" 
he broke out, in a harsh, cutting voice. 

"What! . . . lies! . . . what Tery rude 
behaviour !" stammered out the Professor, in 
a great state of confusion. . . . " And who 
niay you be, if I may venture to ask ?" 

" I am King Abel !" answered the stranger. 
" Is there anything more you would like to 
know?" 

" No, there was not !" 

The Professor was evidently nonplussed, 
and speedily took his departure, slinking 
quietly and slowly off. 

" That is the only way to treat these fellows !" 
exclaimed the knight, bursting out into a 
hoarse laugh. " One can only beat them with 
their own weapons. Lie for he, and boundless 
impudence, is the only way to make them feel." 

" You are not King Abel, then ?" I asked. 

u No more than you are ! What I am is 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 245 

neither here nor there. Enough, that I am 
one of Cain's companions ; an outlaw, as it says 
in the song— 

'* * And shall I out of my country fly, 
And lie on the water cold V " • 

Here the stranger suddenly hroke off, and 
passed his hand over his forehead, as if to drive 
away some evil thought, and then continued : 

" But if you would like to hear King Abel's 
true history, I can tell it you, though I am 
not very fond of raking old histories up." 

Here he again broke off, and turning to 
some one who seemed to stand behind me, 
called out : 

" Look at me, grinner ! He seems to know 
all about it. . . . Ahoy ! who are you ?" 

I looked round. Several persons had now 
come up, among whom was a thick-set young 
man, with an open, intelligent, rather chal- 
lenging, countenance, clad in an old surcoat, 
one sleeve of which dangled down, and with 
the Danish cockade in his cap. He it was 
whom the knight had addressed as " grinner." 

" Herr Sea-count, or Sea-king, or whatever 

* From this it appears probable that the knight was one of 
those notorious freebooters who, after the murder of King Erik 
Qlipping, committed such depredations on the Danish coasts by 
their piratical incursions during the whole of Erik Menved's 
reign. 



246 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

you are, for no king goes about with boots 
Kke yours on dry land," answered the young 
man, with a grin ; " I am but an unfortunate 
volunteer of the so-called Rye's brigade, a 
native of Schleswig, and, therefore, but too 
well versed in King AbeFs history. I come 
direct from the Slie and Danewerk." 

" Direct from the Slie and Danewerk, eh ?" 
resumed the knight. " Then you must know 
all about it. So tell away. But mind, fellow, 
none of your Schleswig-Holstein lies here !" 

" Once on a time," began the soldier, " there 
was a king named Valdemar. Under him 
Denmark reached the highest pinnacle of her 
prosperity ; and from his time, though many a 
false gleam of power and splendour has shot 
up, the time-honoured kingdom has waned. 
Valdemar was the last mighty and prosperous 
monarch Denmark possessed." 

" Fellow ! that is saying much," growled 
the knight. 

" From time immemorial Germany had been 
Denmark's bitterest enemy," continued the 
soldier, not noticing the interruption. "It 
was a very one-sided affair ; but up to that time 
the Danes had maintained their old boundary 
in the south, and were destined to maintain it 
a long while still. Under King Valdemar, 
the Danes gained the ascendancy, and vie- 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 247 

toriously carried their ravages far across the 
frontier. But as the Germans, spite of all 
confederations, were totally unable to stand 
against the victors, they had recourse to 
cunning and treachery. And now fortune 
favoured them. At the battle of Bornhoved, 
King Valdemar's power was broken for ever, 
a battle that forms the unlucky turning-point 
in Denmark's history. Downwards, ever 
downwards, till the present time. 

" And yet King Valdemar was no less 
mighty in peace than in war. Formerly he 
had been sirnamed ' The Conqueror,' now he 
was entitled ' The Law-giver.' Denmark still 
passed through happy days under his rule. 

€i Before his death he divided the succession 
between his sons." 

" His sons !" interrupted the knight in an 
excited voice. "Yes! that was Denmark's 
misfortune. The son of the good and amiable 
Queen Dagmar, another Valdemar, died. His 
posterity would have brought blessings to 
Denmark ; but the wicked and detested Beren- 
garia's sons all lived. They, and their race, 
have been Denmark's bane !" 

" What you say is perfectly true, noble 
sir," remarked the soldier as he continued his 
narrative. 

" Of these sons Valdemar caused allegiance 



248 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

to be sworn to Erik as king. The two others 
got large feoffs under the crown. Abel, the 
second son, got South Jutland. And then the 
old king passed to his fathers, convinced that 
he had secured the prosperity of Denmark in 
the surest way. 

" But it was but a poor prosperity. Soon 
there arose strife between the brothers. Abel 
would not hold his duchy as a feoff of King 
Erik, but sought, by the aid of a German 
alliance, to obtain uncontrolled possession of 
it. The first of his feudal duties was to guard 
the boundary against the attacks of the arro- 
gant and powerful Germans ; but, instead of 
doing so, he brought them in across the 
borders, and thus laid the foundation of the 
* Germanization' of South Jutland. And, what 
was still worse, he gave free admission to a 
German spirit, German morals, and mode of 
thinking, not only in South Jutland, but, when 
he ultimately came to the throne, over the 
whole kingdom of Denmark. At a later 
period this was destined to turn the scales. 
A German element in the country, though 
with empty hands, was to prove a far more 
dangerous enemy than Germans outside with 
needle guns and rifled cannon. Who has not 
heard of the fantastical state Schleswig-Hol- 
stein ? Duke Abel laid the sure, though in- 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 249 

visible, foundation of it. Of one heart with 
the Holsteiners, the Schleswig duke saw in 
the king of Denmark only his born foe. 

" It happened one fine summer in August 
that Abel invited his brother Erik to the town 
of Schleswig. Unsuspecting, and with true 
brotherly love, the good Erik accepted the 
invitation, spite of having been warned in a 
vision not to do so. Abel's heart was full of 
venomous poison, and, before long, it showed 
itself, for he placed his guest, his brother and 
his king, in chains, and gave him over into 
the hands of the executioner. Yes, of the 
executioner ! 

" What more need I say ? The good King 
Erik was shamefully murdered, butchered like a 
lamb, and his body thrown into the river Slie. 

" Denmark's throne now became vacant, and 
after Duke Abel, with four-and-twenty of his 
knights, had taken an oath that he was innocent 
of his brother's death, the stupid Danes chose 
him to be their king. 

" But King Erik had said with his dying 
breath, ' If Abel does not repent, he will die 
a more shameful death than mine !' 

" And so it came to pass. 

" Two years later, the powerful king of Den- 
mark was forced ignominiously to flee before 
the brave peasantry of Friesland, and died by a 



250 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

doughty blow from a Frieslander s axe. His 
corpse lay long uninterred, and his carrion be- 
came a prey to the wild beasts and birds. At 
last he was buried in Schleswig cathedral. But 
King Erik's wicked brother had no peace in his 
grave, his spirit left it, and became the terror 
of the whole town. Then the monks had his 
corpse disinterred, and carried outside the 
town. In the middle of a thick forest they 
dug a deep hole, and, casting it in, drove a 
sharp stake through it to keep it fast down in 
the lower world, where " 

Here the speaker suddenly stopped. On 
looking up, I again saw Cain and his com- 
panion. 

All eyes were fastened on the wretched 
pair. Without moving, and in breathless 
silence, we let them pass by. It seemed as if 
they were terrified. For Cain, ever and anon, 
kept wildly looking behind him, while Abel 
walked with his drawn sword in his hand. 
Just as they passed us, he suddenly halted, and 
turned his terrified face directly towards us. 

"Cain and Abel!" I stammered forth in- 
voluntarily. 

" Ha !" exclaimed the knight, starting up, 
and the hero stood trembling in every limb. 
" But it is like . . . yes ... is it not Erik 7* 

"What do you think, noble sirs?" asked 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 251 

the soldier, in amazement, u as you know, it 
was Erik who was murdered, and " 

"Yes, yes; Erik — Erik G lipping!" muttered 
the knight, and again forced himself to silence. 
" It was — it was only a foolish fancy !" 

*• Truly, only a fancy," interposed a heavy- 
looking person by way of confirmation, who 
was apparently a German lancer. "It is 
neither Erik nor Abel. On my honour, it is 
none other than John of Swabia !" 

" Cain's companion, of whom we were 
speaking, has never styled himself by the one 
name or the other," remarked an old man with 
an air of great importance. " It is notorious." 

" Then are there anonymous personages in 
Hell ?" I inquired. 

" Why not ?" was the answer. " Anony- 
mity is a sacred thing, and must be respected 
here as well as in the world." 

" Enough, enough," interposed the knight, 
with an impatient sneer, as he left off biting 
the button of his sword belt ; " let us hear 
the end of Abel's history before our company 
gets too mixed." 

Thereupon the soldier continued : — 

"Though buried with a stout oaken pole 
through his body, and with powerful incanta- 
tions, King Abel found no rest in his grave. 
He was forced to walk. From century to 



252 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

century down to our day, ghosts have been 
on the increase, becoming more wicked and 
more terrible than ever had been known. 

" There are few people between the Slie 
and the Eider but have a story to tell about 
it. If they have not experienced aught them- 
selves, their fathers before them have. It is 
especially on the banks of the Slie, out on the 
wild heath, and on the old frontier fortress of 
Danewerk, that the spectre may be seen. But 
it haunts inhabited places too, and even vil- 
lages and hamlets. What the wild hunt is in 
Germany, just so is King Abel's wild course 
in South Jutland." 

" Quite right !" remarked a sinister-looking 
monk, who appeared like a run-away galley- 
slave. " At certain periods he returns to the 
earth in the service of the Evil One. But he 
cannot do so as long as the stake is in his 
body; so he looks about him to try and 
wheedle some one to draw it out for him. 
But he who does so receives but a poor reward 
for his service. — Retro, appage, Satanasl — Some 
time ago he got hold of me, but I took good 
care not to do his behest on such terms. Yet 
from what I heard he managed to get out 
after all. Who the ass was this time I do not 
know." 

" Not long since," continued the soldier, " I 



LETTERS FROM HELL, [^253 

was standing by the Danewerk, with my 
country's old foes before me. It was the last 
time there was to be a struggle for the 
time-honoured boundary of the land, or rather 
at last it was to be given up without striking 
a blow. It was a fearful time. Not King 
Abel alone, but all the spirits of evil, seemed to 
be let loose. Indeed, by far the greater pro- 
portion of all the political misfortunes that 
have overtaken Denmark since King Abel's 
time have proceeded from the Germanized 
portion of Southern Jutland. 

" Fratricide seems to have left a lasting 
curse. Abel's spirit haunts the population 
with the boldest machinations falsehood and 
treachery can devise with a fratricidal spirit. 
Recently Abel seems to have triumphed again 
by the power of Germanization and devilry. 
Denmark lies low, as once did the pious King 
Erik, who, bleeding, dying, raised his hand 
aloft, as if taking Heaven to witness. But the 
end is not yet! King Abel, remember the 
wheelwright's axe ! 

" How King Abel infests the southern 
portion of South Jutland for shorter or longer 
periods, the simple folk have many a story to 
tell. Fishermen who ply their business on 
the Slie are often terrified at hearing strange 
sounds proceeding from the shore. It is 



254 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

as if some unearthly, supernatural being 
secretly followed the boats along the banks. 
A howl, or a rattling sound, and all kinds 
of fearful cries and wailings, mark its course. 
Sometimes the spectre shows itself, gene- 
rally in the form of a dark shadow of 
monstrous shape and length, rising up from 
above the water, in pursuit of a clear blue 
light that glides gently along over the rippling 
surface, without ever being able to grasp it. 
Of course the fishermen never follow this 
Jight, and take care not to come within the 
dark shadow. 

"At Mysunde, the narrowest part of the 
river, a huge stone lies out in the water, the 
top of which protrudes above the surface. It 
is the place where King Erik's corpse was 
flung into the stream. Often and often people 
have seen a dark shapeless form sitting on this 
stone, crouched up in a heap, and noiselessly 
stirring the water with a pointed stake. No 
one has ever ventured to disturb that silent 
fisherman ! 

" Sometimes, too, the traveller who is cross- 
ing the heath at night time witnesses no less 
strange sights. As he is wending his way 
beneath one of those' lofty barrows, those me- 
morials of olden time which are especially 
peculiar to the heaths of South Jutland, a 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 255 

stone rolls down and makes him start back. 
He looks up, and sees on the height above a 
dark form seated there, with its hand under 
its chin. So dark is it that it would be in- 
visible were it not that it stands out in promi- 
nent relief against the clear sky. No move- 
ment betrays it to be a living being, but it has 
a pair of eyes that glow like burning coals. 
Woe to the luckless traveller if he stays on 
his course, or if terror makes him pause for a 
single moment ! Never again will he cross 
the heath. But King Abel remains seated on 
the mound till cock-crow, devising evil and 
venomous schemes, which, though he himself 
be dead, yet by the aid of the Evil One, he 
knows how to quicken into life and to diffuse 
into the hearts of the thousands who are 
slumbering around him. 

" But Abel is an uneasy spirit. Still oftener 
may he be seen galloping across the heath on 
a snorting steed; he himself in black, the 
- horse a shining white one, and a couple of black 
hounds following him. White coloured flames 
seem to stream from his horse's nostrils, and 
to flash up from under its hoofs. It is said 
that the spectre's track across the heath can 
be plainly seen long after he has gone. Each 
place where his horse has placed its foot, the 
heather is parched and scorched up. And 



256 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

when on his road he comes to a lonely house, 
he frequently stops, not to give his steed 
breathing time, but to breathe out the over- 
flowing wickedness of his evil heart. If he 
find ever so small a crevice in its walls, it is 
enough. He breathes through it with a force 
that makes windows and doors start open. 
Next morning everything is as usual. But 
the house is no longer the same. King Abel's 
thoughts have stayed behind in it. Even 
people of pure Danish blood and speaking the 
Danish tongue, by virtue of Abel's spirit feel 
with a German heart, and forget father, 
mother, tradition, fatherland, and honour — 
all that is wont to be so dear to man's heart. 

"Forward, forward ! over stock and stone on 
fresh errands. In one night he may visit a 
hundred places. In different tracts he has 
certain paths; and there is more than one 
house to be found where its inmates never 
dare close a door, for the spectre must have 
unimpeded course through. If by chance they 
should be closed, they are violently burst open ; 
and glad enough are the inmates if no other 
disaster come. 

" It is not, however, only over the waste and 
lonely places that King Abel travels at night 
time. There is scarce a town which he has 
not passed through on his wild course. 



LETTERS FKOM HELL. 257 

" When lie approaches all the dogs begin to 
howl in dismal, ominous tones ; the cattle 
bellow and break loose in the stalls. Then the 
farmer knows what is astir, crosses himself 
from under his counterpane, and nestles fur- 
ther down into the bed. Next morning some 
calamity is sure to have happened." 

The speaker ceased ; and for a few moments 
we observed a deep silence, not arising, how* 
ever, from any uncomfortable feeling similar 
to that you may have experienced after having 
listened to a ghost-story in the'twilight hours. 
We know nothing of such feelings here. It 
is readily explained, for we are all of us 
ghosts. At all events, the torments of Hell 
in which we are, is ten thousand times worse 
than all the ghosts in the universe. 

No ! that which made us silent, and which 
made so deep an impression, was the recol- 
lection, the lively recollection, of the world, of 
life. 

It was the soldier who again broke the 
silence. 

" A miserable end befel the three sons of 
the great King Valdemar. Erik was shame- 
fully murdered, according to the unanimous 
testimony of history and of tradition, by his 
brother's orders. Abel met a disgraceful and 
miserable death under a peasant's avenging 

vol. i. s 



258 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

axe. Christopher, according to the story, was 
poisoned in an inn. And all this in the course 
of nine years." 

"Why do you not include Christopher's 
son and successor?" said a new voice; "was 
not Erik Grlipping, too, barbarously mur- 
dered?" 

I looked up ; I did not know the stranger : 
but on looking after the knight, he had dis- 
appeared. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 259 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Would you believe it? However deeply 
engrossed I was on my excursion with what I 
saw and experienced, I waa far more engrossed 
with myself. Naturally enough ! There can 
be no talk of real diversion in Hell ; even in 
the wildest hubbub the soul can never succeed 
in losing itself. And, would you think it? 
Not only do my evil deeds recur to my 
thoughts to torture and to harass me, but my 
good deeds also. I repeat, it is but natural. 
For our best deeds even are not free from 
blemish. There is a sharp hook to them all, 
and it is with this that they recur to the 
.memory here in Hell. It is like a talon thrust 
into the heart. 

listen to me, while for a little while I am 
constrained to speak of myself again. 

There was a young man in my office I was 
very fond of. Among other business matters, 
he was entrusted with several small sums of 
money. Presently I began to smell a rat; 



260 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

and several little but corroborative circum- 
stances seemed only to confirm my reasons for 
suspecting him. I watched him narrowly, and 
before long discovered that he had taken to 
gambling. By a strange coincidence an op- 
portunity presented itself of catching him in 
the very act, and I determined to avail myself 
of it. 

The gaming-house was situate in a lonely 
part of the suburbs ; and though the adventure 
was not unattended with danger, I thought 
little of it. Certainly among my many fail- 
ings I did not lack courage. 

It was one snowy, wretched, wintry night, 
towards midnight, that I stood outside a dilapi- 
dated, apparently uninhabited house, wrapped 
up in a large, coarse overcoat. I gave a certain 
signal, and the door was immediately opened. 
At the end of a dark passage, along which I 
had to grope my way, was another door ; it 
was locked, but some one presently opened it, 
and I entered the hell. Here I found a 
numerous company of a low, varied kind, 
who seemed quite at home in an atmosphere 
oppressive from heat, and redolent with the 
fumes of tobacco. They were playing different 
games. At one of the tables my clerk pre- 
• sided; he was keeping the bank. At that 
instant an idea flashed across me. It was 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 261 

hazardous, but I felt sure it would succeed; 
so I approached the table, and deposited my 
stakes. 

His eye fell on mine directly ; and the effect 
my apparition had on him was terrible. He 
turned deadly pale, tottered to a chair, and let 
the cards fall out of his hajids. When he had 
somewhat recovered himself, he rose up and 
seemed hesitating whether he should fly or 
strike me to the ground. But a stern look 
and a sign on my part were enough to restrain 
him. One of the bystanders noticing his 
indisposition offered him a brimming goblet 
of wine, which he clutched eagerly and 
drained to the very dregs ; and now he became 
as crimson as he had been pale before. Once 
more he ventured to raise his eyes to mine, 
but a cold, icy glance made him speedily drop 
them. I stood to all appearances before him 
as a perfect stranger, simply demanding that 
*the game should proceed. The others de- 
sired the same. No one, of course, had the 
slightest suspicion of the real state of the 
case. 

There was* then, no mercy for the sinner ; 
he had to endure it a while longer yet. With 
trembling hands he dealt out the cards, re- 
ceived and paid the stakes. The game went 
merrily on, and odd enough the banquier 



262 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

seemed now to have all the luck. But I 
waited ; I did not doubt but that a turn would 
come soon. At first I had only been one of 
many players; now I was almost the only 
one. At the proper time I began to force my 
game. Never had such sums of money been 
staked there before ; therefore the excitement 
was enormous. But the banquier was the 
most excited of all, he seemed as if he were 
on the rack. An end, however, must come ! 
One turn more, and the bank was broken ! 

Thereupon the wretched man sprang up, as 
if beside himself, and endeavoured to rush 
past me, crying out, " All is lost ; all is lost !" 

But I seized him by the arm. " Not all," I 
said, in a low tone ; " there is more to be lost 
yet ! . . . Stay ! We will go together !" 

And 1 made him take his coat, hat and 
stick, and leave the company with me in quite 
a decorous manner. Of course a great ex- 
citement prevailed; but it was managed so 
quickly and adroitly, that no one thought of 
interposing. 

So I took him with me. With tottering 
knees he crawled along by my side, while a 
strict silence was observed by both of us. 

But as soon as I had got him into my room, 
I opened upon him. " I had had such a high 
opinion of him, he had been so trusted, and 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 263 

had deceived me so shamefully. ... He must 
smart for it !" 

He appeared very contrite, humbled, in 
fact, crushed to the earth. Never had I seen 
a more miserable-looking object. At length 
he left off begging for mercy for himself; but 
besought me in the most piteous terms for his 
poor mother. He was her only support, and 
the sole joy that she had left in the world. 

I let him beg and pray a long while. I had 
fully made up my mind that he should not 
escape too cheaply. He should not forget 
this night as long as he lived. 

At length I began to relent. 

" I would give him a chance of showing me 
that he was really sorry, and of becoming a 
new and better man." 

So everything was satisfactorily arranged. 
No! not quite satisfactorily either. For as 
he was leaving, I noticed that he staggered, 
as if he had been intoxicated, and could 
• scarcely keep on his feet. I could not let him 
go home in this plight, for his mother would 
have at once suspected something. I rang 
for the servant, and had a bed made up for 
the poor fellow in my house. 

Next morning he was in a raging fever, 
and became delirious. The thought of his 
mother now flashed across my mind ; he had 



264 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

been thinking much more of her than of him- 
self. Of course it was out of the question to 
think of removing him. So I hastily made 
up my mind. Ringing for my old, confi- 
dential servant, I gave him strict orders to 
make the young man's stay in my house a 
profound secret, and then wrote to his mother 
to tell her that " I had been obliged to send 
him off suddenly on some important business 
that admitted of no delay. He would pro- 
bably be absent," I said, " for some weeks, and 
I would take an early opportunity of calling 
upon her." 

Thus, under the Almighty, his fate rested 
in my hands. For weeks he lay in a violent 
fever. Nearly all my time was divided be- 
• tween him and his mother. In reality I was 
all that a brother could be to the one, and a 
son to the other. And when at last the sick 
man began to be convalescent, I nursed him 
with the tenderest care ; while at the same 
time it was no little tax on my powers of 
invention to tranquillize his mother. 

At last he recovered his health. And then it 
was given out that he had just returned from 
his journey, and had been taken ill on the road. 

Yes, indeed he had been on a journey to 
the kingdom of death, and it was from this 
journey he had returned. But the secret was 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 265 

well kept, and never came to his mother's 
ears,. I put him into another post in the 
office, and never had occasion to find any fault 
with him again. 

But now to the main point ! 

Possibly you may say that I had every 
reason to be satisfied with myself. I also 
thought so once. But here . . . here the scales 
have fallen off from before my eyes ; every- 
thing is exposed to me in all its nakedness 
and clearness. 

In itself it was no bad idea thus to seize 
the bird by the wing, and to keep it a prisoner 
till it was completely tamed. But I am bound 
to confess that the spirit that prompted me 
was a presumptuous conceit. My self-com- 
placency did not feel appeased by the moral 
power I held over the delinquent. With one 
look I had compelled him to take up his cards 
and resume the game ; and then I had given 
him a lesson which was a safe guarantee that 
he would never take a card in his hands again. 

And then as to my kindness towards him, 
after I had once admitted him to mercy. 
Surely it was a praiseworthy deed ! 

But if I must speak the truth, it had its 

^ principal source in the feeling that I had been 

too severe with him, and harder than was 

necessary. I had found a kind of cruel pleasure 

in seeing him writhe under the lash of my in- 



266 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

dignation. And thus, my friend, what becomes 
of the good action ? It is its deficiencies only 
that now goes to my heart and tortures me. 

Now it is I that writhe under the thought 
of what his sufferings must have been. Con- 
tradictory as it may appear, it is still true. I 
suffer from the tortures of a sincere com- 
passionateness. 

All his life through he bore traces of my 
excessive severity towards him. All the 
buoyancy and high spirits of youth had 
vanished all at once, and he never became the 
man his youth gave promise he would be. It 
seemed as if something were rent asunder 
within him. A shy, nervous look, ever retro- 
spective, bore ample testimony to the secret 
history of his life. 

Oh ! these good deeds, how many have they 
brought into misery? For, rest assured, if 
most of the good actions done were to be sub- 
mitted to a scrutinizing investigation they 
would yield a pitiful result* Not that I mean 
to assert that there are no such things as good 
actions. But when everything is taken into 
consideration what are the best of them but 
simple duty ? 

However one may twist and turn them, no 
balance will ever be got out of them through 
all eternity. 

Do you know what self-torture is ? Doubt- 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 267 

less ! Else your experience of the world has 
not been great. You know then that there is 
no greater torture than self-torture. But only 
first in Hell "does it become quite clear. " It 
constitutes the very essence of the torture of 
Hell, that we ourselves are the instruments of 
our own torture. 

One of the mildest forms of this self-torture 
is musing ; and yet how wearing it is ! Yes, 
wearing is the proper expression for it. We 
wear ourselves so utterly away that there does 
not remain a healthy thought behind. Then, 
naturally, we are obliged to pause. We stand 
on the threshold of insanity, but over it we 
cannot step. How the brain swims ! How the 
heart burns! We are just in that state in 
which people in the world commit suicide. 
But in Hell we can never cany it further than 
to wear ourselves away. 

Was there not once something called " The 
Three Articles of Faith ?" I have a strangely 
misty and yet firm idea about it. Had it not 
something to do with the Trinity ? And was 
it not one of the most precious gifts bestowed 
on mortal man ? 

I have mused over it till I have well-nigh 
lost my senses. But now I have grown a 
little wiser. Of what benefit had it been to 
me had I been able to recall them ? To the 



268 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

faith, to which their name and substance are 
due, I should never have attained. Faith 
would ever have remained to me but an empty- 
idea. Yes, I have the idea ; but how hollow, 
how terribly hollow ! There is a bottomless, 
yawning abyss in it. 

What is to believe ? God's Son is the object 
of faith. I know it, and the devils know it. 
He is the Saviour ! But how He has become 
a Saviour, or how a soul has any part or share 
in Jlim, alas ! alas ! I have no conception. 

And it is just the same with repentance. 
If I could only feel a moment's real repent- 
ance, that same moment I should be saved. 
But, and it is a natural consequence, I torture 
myself in vain. 

Ah ! I can . . . and yet I cannot. Some- 
times I seem so near it, my tears seem on the 
point of bursting out. But it is all an imposi- 
tion ; it is in vain. 

" Only one single tear," I sigh, in insufferable 
agony. Oh, eternal mercy ! Ah ! what use to 
invoke without faith ? . . . Only a single tear ! 

Time runs on. Nonsense, of course, for 
there is no time here ! However, there must 
be something that runs on ; the ever-waxing 
light shows it. The important, the terribly 
brilliant moment is approaching when Para- 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 269 

dise shall swallow up the darkness of Hell in 
its splendour. Yet, you must not attach any 
weight to what I am saying. I am talking of 
what I am quite ignorant. Perhaps this mo- 
ment may be terrible without being magnifi- 
cent ; perhaps it may still be far off. 

Time, however, runs its course in the world; 
we perceive that plainly. Recently a pom- 
pous announcement of a Te Deum having 
been held in one of the world's capitals 
reached us. It must have sounded through 
the lowest corner of Hell — the Devil's corner. 
It must have been a gala day for the damned. 

The cause of this Te Deum was the prosper- 
ous result of a war which a powerful state had 
been waging against one of its smaller arid 
weaker neighbours. A regular predatory in- 
cursion ; but it was successful. 

The world offered its congratulations ; but 
this was not enough for the conqueror. He 
must solemnly congratulate himself, and chant 
a Te Deum 1 

These Te Deum festivals are the most scan- 
dalous things in the world. It is more than 
hypocrisy, it is boundless impudence. In 
order to appear respectable in the eyes of the 
world, a nation does not hesitate to employ an 
official blasphemy whereby it may gild over 
its baseness. So far do people go in their 



270 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

shameful endeavours to convert dirt into gold, 
that God even must be dragged down from 
Heaven into the mire. One day they will 
bitterly repent it ! 

One of the illusions wherein the world so 
readily rocks itself to slumber, and about 
which there is so much loose talk, is the high 
degree of moral dignity it conceives it has 
attained. It is the most wretched, most ridi- 
culous self-conceit. The world is just as evil 
in disposition, just as brutal and as cowardly 
as ever ; only a little more polished perhaps. 
In the great world there is just as little of any- 
thing that is absolutely valid, or of a fixed 
nature, as of old. Honour, morality, truth- 
fulness, righteousness, compassionateness, all 
is mere outside show, directly any higher 
aim, that is to say, when interest, makes its 
demand. 

The right of the strong has a wide extent 
still! 

Small states, such as Holland, Belgium, 
Denmark, &c, are a prey to the first great 
power that only has the audacity to make the 
venture. Yes, to make the venture ; everything 
depends on that. >Ajjd if the enterprise suc- 
ceed, the deed of violence is at once justified. 

Such in fact is the real state of the world, 
of the so-called public morality. If in civil 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 271 

and in social life men observed the same rule 
with each other as obtains between states, the 
world would be one vast robber's den, unfit 
for any human being to live in. 

Yes, truly, one must allow that broad is the 
road that leads to destruction. But it is from 
Hell that one first gets to learn its breadth. 

Some dance, as it were, along this road. 
But it takes up some little time, for they have 
to run into so many inns, taverns, and casinos 
on the road. The whole of their life is a pas- 
time, a sport, a feast ; and they do not inquire 
whether it is God or the Devil that gives the 
feast. They employ all their senses, and if 
occasion offers procure themselves one or two 
extra senses. It is against nature, it is true ; 
but what of that ? The enjoyment is all the 
greater. They drag as many things as possi- 
ble with them into the whirl wherein they 
revolve; whether genuine or spurious is a 
matter of supreme indifference. They breathe 
only in the present moment; their future is 
the next ball, rout, or banquet, the last piece 
at the theatre, or the latest fashion; their 
eternity, the wearisome hour of expectation. 
They say to themselves, " We live, we live." 
But death holds them in his grasp. Holbein's 
well-known Dance of Death in the old town of 



272 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Basle is more than a fable. They dance, 
saunter, prate, sleep, and eat themselves 
through the world. Suddenly a little wrench, 
and . . . they are in Hell ! 

And many others creep as it were along the 
broad road. One would think it was trouble- 
some work, but it is not. The mole in the earth 
does not find it more troublesome than the bird 
in the air. And they are a kind of mole. 

" We look to what is solid," say they ; and 
then they burrow down into the earth. 

" We see," say they, and they are right. 

It is a mere fable that moles are blind from 
their birth. On the contrary they have the 
keenest eyesight ; even for every little morsel 
they meet with on the road. They are not, in- 
deed, searching for morsels ; on the contrary, 
they are looking out for whole pieces. But 
nothing is beneath their notice, so they put up 
with the morsels of the earth's treasures ; for 
they know none other. Ever looking down- 
wards, only that which is found in the soil is 
of value to them. Of what is above they are 
ignorant, neither do they trouble themselves to 
know. It has never excited their attention that 
there is a Heaven, and that it is full of stars. 
Their life is one endless burrowing; nay, not 
endless ! For when they have thus burrowed 
through greater or smaller portions of the 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 273 

world, all at once they come upon a hole quite 
unawares. This hole is death. Down they 
.plump into it, and when they awaken to con- 
sciousness they find themselves in Hell. 

Amongst the many wonderful things in 
the world, this is doubtless one of the most 
wonderful, that although all men know that 
they must die — nothing more certain than 
that — yet there are so few who think of death, 
and fewer still who make any preparations 
for it. 

Most persons die, as it were, quite unawares. 
So most of them awaken in Hell ! How can it 
be otherwise ? 

Yes, most of them ! But even here there is 
a wonderful circumstance connected with it. 
In Hell one meets all kinds of persons one had 
never expected to meet. Respected, honoured, 
and, what is more, lamented, they passed out of 
the world ; the tearful eyes of those they left 
behind were upraised to Heaven. But the. dear 
departed ones were not there ; they were in 
Hell ! It can readily be explained. God judges 
differently to men. However good and excel- 
lent these persons may have been, they lacked 
the most needful thing of all ; that on which 
everything else depends — a believing heart, 
filled with God. 

VOL. I. T 



274 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Perhaps these persons may have gained the 
whole world, but they have lost their own 
souls. 

And now for the other side ! 

It is often the case that persons never come 
here, though they may have been long ex- 
pected. Their deeds, their fame, has gone 
before them; has long since, as it were, an- 
nounced their arrival. We expect them, but 
in vain; they do not come. Only one ex- 
planation is possible. Great sinners as they 
may have been, miserable evil-doers of a deep 
dye, still they may have found mercy before 
God in a fruitful repentance. Perhaps at the 
last moment the Saviour interposed between 
them and Hell, where they were so surely 
expected, and where their place was as good 
as already allotted. 

Oh ! you who have loved, who bitterly mourn 
over your departed ones, you will naturally ask 
with throbbing heart and streaming eyes, 

" Ah ! cannot then our earnest prayers be 
of any profit to you ? " 

I do not know. But pray for us ; pray still 
for us with all your heart, and without ceasing. 
This I know ; true love can never be lost, can 
never be without fruit. 

For God's being is Love, and His Son is the 
fulness of love towards men. Maybe, maybe 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 275 

your prayers will even yet benefit us ; not now, 
only, but through all eternity* 

Whether I look forward or backward my 
suffering is equally great, though different in 
nature. If I look forward, all my suffering 
concentrates in one terrible thought — an end- 
less, hopeless existence. If I look back, in * 
the ever smarting remorse of an ill-spent life. 
Yes, from this place is it only first evident 
what fruits, what blessed fruits one's earthly 
life could have borne. Oh ! how happy are 
you who still live, and who still have the 
power of choosing your fate. 

" As long as there is life there is hope ! " 
Truer words were never spoken. Oh ! then, 
never give way to that false, that destroying 
idea, that it is too late. This lie alone has 
destroyed more souls than all the vices of the 
world together. It is not too late ! Even if 
death awaited you on the morrow it is not too 
late. Your earthly life, however - exhausted 
it may be, can still bear fruit in peace, in joy ; 
and the glory of life eternal can still dawn 
upon you. 

Change then your hearts ; turn, and seek 
peace where only it may be found. 

Oh ! if you only had a clear apprehension of 
the reality as it is, you would never despair. 
However oppressed, miserable, or doomed, you 



276 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

may feel yourself to be, you have no reason to 
despair. It is not on your side that despair 
finds a home; ah, no! it is here! Here it 
really is too late ! 

If you only had a clear apprehension of the 
very small proportion your earthly life bears 
to the sum total of your existence, and how very 
little of that is yet lost, even though all your 
worldly expectations may have been ship- 
wrecked. AH do I say ? But no mortal has 
ever come so far as that. However void the 
world may appear to him, there is still many a 
green spot to be found in it ; a man's happiness 
can take root on more than one place in the 
world, if only hope does not fail. 

And the world is not all ; it is but a small 
portion of your allotted existence. Look up 
to the stars in the sky. There are more than 
you can number. And if the world really 
were lost to you, what of that ? It is but 
one star fallen from your Heaven. You 
have still all the others left. Therefore do 
not despair. It is a lie from Hell, if any one 
tells you it is too late. You can still find 
happiness as surely as there is a God. Only 
return and seek Him, who can save, and who 
can preserve you. It is still vouchsafed you, 
late though it may be, to begin a new life. 
But delay not to enter upon that blessed road 



LETTERS PROM HELL, 277 

which leads from star to star into the kingdom 
of glory. Oh, only do not delay ! 

For at the same moment death overtakes 
you on the old path, Heaven with all its stars 
will collapse, and you will find yourself in 
eternal darkness. 

It is not too late. For however much be 
lost, the most important thing of all to be 
saved is still left; even life itself, your im- 
mortal soul, your peace, your bliss. 

Have you lost your mammon ? Your soul 
is of ten thousand times greater value. 

Are you without a future ? Behold eternity 
lies before you. 

Has your love been betrayed ? Love still 
will save you. 

Are you living a life of abasement ? There 
is an eternal, a perfect reparation. 

Has the world abandoned you ? Heaven is 
still left to you. 

Can you no longer see any joy before you ? 
Still you may come to be an inheritor of ever- 
lasting salvation. 

Do you now understand how very little is 
really yet lost — lost perhaps in itself — but yet 
so little compared with what is still to be won 
or lost ? Then take courage. It is certainly 
true ; however far you may have gone it is 
not yet too late ! It is not yet too late to 



278 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

begin a new, a holy, a blessed and a happy 
life. 

I have seen her. It was as if death shud- 
dered through me again. Shaken to the core 
of my heart, I rushed away from the sight, 
and fainted under a load of overwhelming 
accusation. Yes it was her! her, against 
whom my sin is so great, that I have never 
once sought to vindicate myself. Do you feel 
how much this implies ? 

Oh ! my friend ! I have never spoken of it, 
but long have secretly dreaded lest Anna, 
whose life I so thoughtlessly, so wantonly 
destroyed, should meet me in Hell. 

She is here ! I have seen her ! 

I was walking with one of my acquain- 
tances. 

" Do you know Undine ?" he asked. 

On my replying in the negative, he con- 
tinued, 

" There you may see her* 

I followed the direction in which he poin- 
ted, and saw a divine, comely female form, 
very lightly clad, and with dishevelled hair. 
Her dress seemed to cling to her limbs ; she 
seemed dripping wet. She was quietly occu- 
pied in wringing out her saturated dress and 
her heavy hair. At that moment she raised 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 279 

her eyes ; a terrible shudder ran through me. 
It was Anna ! 

Yes, it was her ! The same regular, lovely 
features ; the same graceful figure ; and yet, 
though easy to recognise, still so changed. 
Ah, how changed ! Truly the same features, 
but how disfigured, how sadly depraved! 
Passion, lust, despair, had each in turn left 
their marks on her earthly career. She seemed 
to be many years older; and perhaps but 
few years had elapsed between her fall and her 
death. And her death — I could not doubt it 
— had been the death of despair beneath the 
waters. 

I shuddered and quivered as a criminal does 
when he suddenly beholds the scaffold. It was 
my work — this degraded, abandoned, but so 
fair, so beauteous a form ! I was crushed. I 
lay as it were upon the rack beneath this over- 
whelming load of responsibility. 

There she sat wringing out her clothes and 
her hair by turns, and ever and anon clasping 
her hands in despair. And I writhed too, 
under the bitter gnawing of my conscience. 

Thus she sat a while, while sigh after sigh 
convulsed her bosom. Oh, those sighs ! Her 
full bosom heaved and sank, as if it would 
burst. At first I thought to flee ; a word 
from her mouth I felt would slay me. But I 



280 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

know not what rapture seized me, for all at 
once I started forward as if to meet her. 

Then first did she become aware of my pre- 
sence. She sprang up, and regarding me 
with a look full of dismay and loathing fled 
away. 

It was impossible to overtake her. By the 
power of her will alone she was able to keep 
ever at the same distance from me. At last 
she disappeared among a crowd of new comers, 
who were just making their sorrowful entrance 
into Hell. 

Then I turned back, as if I were being 
lashed by the Furies ! 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 281 



CHAPTER XV. 

I am just come from the post office ! I had 
only just discovered that there was a post 
office in Hell. No, there is nothing wanting 
here, save everything that a being needs to 
live and to hope for. 

I went, then, to the post office to see if there 
were any letters for me. I felt impelled to go. 

There is something very peculiar about this 
post office. Who has not heard speak of the 
Uriah and Judas' letters? Some maintain 
that their discovery arose in the east with 
king David, in the west with king Fenge. 
But it is of much older date ; for doubtless 
it dates back to the Devil himself. Nowa- 
days, the art is widely extended over the 
whole world ; yes, many practise it in accor- 
dance with a purely natural impulse without 
ever having heard speak of it. 

Well then, all these Uriah and Judas' letters 
go straight to Hell, and the parties concerned 
pay the postage at the cost of their salvation. 



282 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

They are left lying in the paste restante, 
until the party comes, not the one to whom 
they are addressed, but the one who has writ- 
ten them. It is hard to have to take these 
letters ; they literally burn one's fingers. But 
that is nothing compared to how they burn 
the heart. For the letters will be digested ; 
the miserable writers are compelled to eat 
their own poisonous dirt. 

But there were no letters for me; so I 
have not been a Judas. For the moment I 
really felt quite light-hearted. But naturally 
this was a mere illusion. 

Those Judas' letters lead me to another con- 
sideration connected with them. 

There is not a more serious thing in the 
world than to subscribe one's name, and yet 
there are few things which the children of 
the world do more thoughtlessly than this. 
But woe to these thoughtless ones! Every 
false subscription, every name which the 
writer repudiates, goes straight to Hell, and 
pulls with irresistible power — yes, irresistible ; 
for God alone can break asunder the connec- 
tion — till the writer follows after it, and finds 
himself in the torments of Hell. 

I have seen a king sitting with a document 
before him ; he has sat thus for centuries. To 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 283 

this document he had once, in an unhappy 
moment, subscribed his name ; what name he 
does not now know, for he remembers it no 
longer ; it is quite illegible on the parchment. 
A blood spot has blotted it out. He ponders 
and ponders in the anguish and pain of his 
heart ; the death-sweat stands out on his fore- 
head : but the name is and remains wanting ; 
it is not visible. It is his incessant torment 
in Hell ! Oh ! if he had only not put his name 
to that parchment ! 

I have seen — but it would take me to too 
great a length if I were to speak of all I have 
seen of this nature. It is especially the so- 
called high politics that fills Hell with so 
many false names, and miserable objects con- 
nected therewith. It bears the epithet high, 
because it is ever the world's custom to attach 
high-sounding titles to the most despicable 
things. It is styled an exalted policy just 
because it is something of the most contempti- 
ble that is to be found in the world. 

The other day one of these treaties arrived 
here. There was a great blotch in it. Of 
course we knew what it meant. The state 
of the case stood as follows : 

There was a little state, so little that it could 
only exist on the most gracious sufferance, that 
is to say, it occupied a vacant space among 



284 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

other states. They had been so benevolent as 
to say that it was necessary to the balance of 
Europe; in other words, that each of its, 
powerful neighbours had a great wish for it ; 
but as the one could not envy the other its 
possession, it remained undisturbed. It was a 
kind of European taboo. In order to make it 
known to all the world, and to place it once 
for all on a firm basis, six of the neighbouring 
great powers drew up a treaty between them 
in the name of the Holy Trinity, and affixed 
their names to it, whereby the existence of 
this little state was assured, of course, to the 
end of time. 

Twelve years passed away, when a totally 
unexpected and excellent opportunity pre- 
sented itself to two of its powerful neighbours 
to mix themselves up in the concerns of this 
little country, and to feather their nests 
cheaply. Of course, the treaty was rather 
awkwardly in the way ; but by an arbitrary 
pretext it was nullified. They simply dis- 
owned it. It may have appeared to be a 
hazardous thing to do, but in reality it was not 
so : brute force is always sure to overawe, espe- 
cially when it conducts itself with unbounded 
impudence, and tramples all respect under foot. 

The other great powers growled a little it 
is true, and . thought it was very shameful 



v 



w 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 285 

behaviour ; indeed, one of them went so far as 
to give vent to big words. But there it ended. 
One after the other gave it to be understood 
that it did not feel itself bound to insist on 
the observance of the treaty any more than the 
others, and thus gradually they quietly slunk 
away ; and when it came to the point, they all 
in a mass drew in their horns, and let the treaty 
go to the winds. 

Thus, then, was the little state handed over to 
th^ tender mercies of the stronger. The world 
cried "Ah !" over the disgraceful conduct; but 
no one moved so much as a little finger in 
the cause of righteousness and of compassion ; 
' not even a word was spoken ! An earnest 
word, spoken at the proper time, would have 
been sufficient to avert the wrong. But 
Europe, under the circumstances, knew no 
better policy than to remain silent, and per- 
fectly passive. So the strong fell upon the 
little one ; three against one ; sounded its 
ass's trumpet over its easily won victories, 
and knew not on which leg to stand, so elated 
were they with the pride of conquest. And 
then, when they had the little one between 
their knees, they slaughtered it at their lei- 
sure ; laying the fattest and best pieces on 
one side, in order to agree about the distribu- 
tion afterwards, as best they might. 



286 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

This is an instance of an exalted policy, and 
of the state of public morality in the Nineteenth 
Century ! But the tale is not finished yet. 

Torn asunder and bleeding, too little and too 
weak hereafter to subsist alone, the unhappy 
victim looked around for a refuge, for a place 
of resort. Towards the north there dwelt 
kindred peoples. Naturally its first thoughts 
were directed to them. But thereon, one of 
the other powers, that had been a party to the 
treaty, thundered out, 

* You must not venture on such a step; we 
will not allow it P 

In its despair, it next turned to the south. 
Betrayed and deserted by all who had called 
themselves its friends — mark well, that it was 
in its despair — it asked itself the question, 
whether it were not better to give itself up 
entirely into the enemy's hands, than to allow 
itself to be dismembered. One knows at least 
what an enemy is. But before the thought 
could well be realized, a voice just as mighty 
as the former, thundered from another side, 

" You must not venture upon it ; we will 
not permit it." 

Truly, it was a hard case ! Abandoned by 
its friends, crushed and torn asunder by its 
enemies, it dared not with its bleeding residue 
seek for refuge where best it might. It seemed 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 287 

just as if it might not exist, neither one way 
nor the other. It was like cutting off a man's 
arms and legs, and then forbidding him to 
seek the doctor with the bleeding stumps, or 
to look about him for a corner where to lie 
down and die. 

This is one example out of many of an ex- 
alted policy ! But there is more still. 

The treaty, of course, went direct to Hell, 
with all its subscriptions, not in the name of 
the triune God, but of the Devil. And as 
Abel's blood cried aloud from earth to Heaven, 
so do these subscriptions cry aloud from Hell 
to earth. Each name will claim its own. 
And these subscriptions pull with a secret, but 
powerful, aye, an irresistible force. They are 
like a waterspout at sea ; they will be satiated. 
You, then, who have placed your names in 
pawn in Hell, tremble for yourselves ! Come to 
your senses ! It is but a short road between 
earth and Hell. Unless you meet the merciful 
God upon it you will surely come here. 

There have only been two persons in the 
world who were able to teach me patience ; 
my mother and Lili. But Lili's power over 
me, though her nature was so retiring and 
gentle, was, beyond compare, the stronger of 
the two. On my mother's side it was a cold 



288 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

sense of duty that influenced me ; but on Lili's 
it was an indescribable heart-warming good- 
ness and tenderness. Conscious of my great 
physical strength I was passionate and impe- 
rious. I had a decided inclination to break 
through all opposition, and to overcome all 
impediments. Even at what was literally im- 
possible I chafed and involuntarily clenched 
my hand. During our journey abroad this un- 
ruly temper made itself apparent ; but it was, 
moreover, on this very journey that Lili gra- 
dually gained such complete control over me. 
I went to school with her without knowing it ; 
strange enough, I must add, she knew it just as 
little herself — and among the good, precious 
things I learnt, or began to learn, was patience. 

How vividly it all appears before me ! 

We had come to Lucerne, and were to cross 
into Italy over St. Gothard. I had determined 
that Lili should thoroughly enjoy this passage 
across the Alps. In my opinion there is 
nothing more lovely in the world than this 
sudden transition from the severe north to the 
mild Hesperian south. By crossing the St. 
Gothard, Spltigen, or Simplon, the fulness of 
Italy's loveliness is gathered into one journey 
from morning till night. 

A foolish reminiscence! Why can I not 
help renewing it with the aid of all my senses ? 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 289 

The greater the enjoyment then, the greater 
the torment now. 

We were, then, in Lucerne ! The weather 
was as unfavourable as it could be, and we 
had to linger there a whole week. It was a 
severe trial to me. Every morning Lili and 
I used to go out on the long bridge, called the 
Hof briicke, over the river Reuss, to look at 
the state of the weather. We could scarcely 
see fifty paces before us across the lake. 
Everything was enveloped in mist and fog ; 
not a single mountain top peeped out, except 
for an instant, and then vanished. There 
seemed no signs of any improvement in the 
weather. 

Never shall I forget those morning walks, 
so vexing, and yet so pleasant. We used 
to walk and linger there for the chance of 
its clearing up. Lili would lead me up and 
down the fourteen hundred feet long bridge 
like a wild animal in chains. In her presence 
I did not like to break out. But I could not 
help biting my lips, and now and then stamp- 
ing my feet on the wooden planks of the 
bridge. I used to do it involuntarily. Yet 
this girl of sixteen coerced the wild nature 
within me so easily. But one gentle pressure 
of her soft arm, and I curbed every expression 
of impatience. The fact was I could have 

vol. i. u 



290 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

thrown myself down on the wet, dirty planks 
and worshipped her. 

How inventive, how fall of spirit she was in 
diverting and amusing me, while we paced 
backwards and forwards on that strange old 
bridge. It was roofed over, and between the 
rafters was a long row of quaint old paintings 
of the most genial composition and execution. 
She would stop before one, now before another, 
and by her conversation would put such ani- 
mation into the pictures, that I could not help 
being engrossed and even smiling. Often, in- 
deed, I was obliged to burst out into a loud laugh. 

When we had thus waited, and waited in 
vain, and she had succeeded in putting me in 
a good humour again, we would return to the 
hotel, where my mother was waiting breakfast 
for us. 

At last early one morning it did clear up. 
It was a regular holiday. We had come out 
earlier than usual, and were standing on the 
bridge, when the curtain of clouds began to 
lift. The lake gradually unfolded itself to our 
view, and its lovely shores became quickly 
visible. Presently a mountain peak peeped 
out. We could not tear ourselves away from 
it; we stood as if we had been enchanted 
to the spot, until the whole transformation had 
taken place. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 291 

At length the brilliant panorama revealed 
itself in all its magnificence. The shores of 
the lake lay in one extended bow before us ; 
while above, mountain upon mountain reared 
its head aloft, and in the background, and 
highest of all, the Central Alps with their eter- 
nal snow, arranged like a frame formed of the 
Righi, Pilate, Dodi, Uri-Rothstock, &c., &c. ; 
but who can remember all their names ? One 
mountain after the other emerged into view in 
the dazzling brightness of its majesty. 

I nearly embraced Lili in my ecstasy, but lost 
nothing by not doing so. For she was as 
much overwhelmed as I was. Involuntarily 
she laid her arm on my shoulder. I thought 
I could hear her heart beating, but perhaps it 
was my own. 

So the next day we were early astir, and 
after crossing the lake made the ascent of St. 
Gothard with joyous hearts. The sailors were 
of opinion that the weather was not to be re- 
lied on ; but we trusted to our usual good luck, 
and gave ourselves up to the enjoyment of the 
day. We walked and drove by turns. Lili 
could not rest; no sooner had she taken a 
little repose than she was again in motion. 
The mountain nature continued to develop 
itself more majestically. The first alpine rose 
had well nigh cost me my life. It was for 



292 .LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Lili, of course. What a day ! A day like 
that is a whole existence. 

As the sun se twe passed through the wild 
dark valley of Urserndal, and put up for the 
night in the little village of Andermatt. 

But the next day, what a sorrowful change ! 
A change of weather had taken place during 
the night ; snow had fallen on the mountain 
tops, and a storm was still raging. 

Great was my impatience at this new stop- 
page. The day passed, and the next, but no 
alteration in the weather. I made little ex- 
cursions on all sides, which were not devoid of 
danger. But it worried Lili, and she begged 
me to remain at home. Of course I obeyed, 
and my reward was great. What no other 
person in the world could have done, she suc- 
ceeded in doing. She made the time pass 
pleasantly away, and what is more, gave me, 
unknown to myself, a further and more com- 
plete lesson in patience. I could with reason 
say I became as patient as a lamb, but that I 
dislike the comparison. 

She took me with her from one house to the 
other in the little village. She entered them 
all, as if she had known the inmates long, 
and the good folks, indeed, received her as 
an old acquaintance. Those quaint moun- 
taineers so thoroughly appreciated her unre- 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 293 

served, confiding manner. Everywhere they 
opened their doors to her, and told her all 
about their domestic affairs and mode of life. 
The simple economy of these mountaineers — 
so different to anything we had seen before — 
was undoubtedly very attractive ; but to speak 
the truth, I saw little else besides Lili. And 
who could have turned their eyes away from 
her ? She was like a sunbeam in those dark 
huts, so ineffably graceful, and yet, in a far 
higher degree, so benevolent. It was quite 
plain to me, and I am convinced that the 
people entertained the same opinion, that she 
hallowed everything she came in contact with. 
Oh, Lili! I see you before me. A purer, 
more fragrant being could not have been 
found in the world. 

But I am wandering ! 

She took me with her to the small work- 
shops and bazaars, where we found all manner 
of pretty things carved in wood, botanical and 
mineralogical collections. Boldly she knocked 
at every door, and everywhere she appeared 
welcome. It was like enchantment. A com- 
mon observer might have said, "Yes, youth 
and beauty possess such a power !" But in 
reality far higher means were at Lili's dis- 
posal in this enchantment. God alone knew 
them fully. 



294 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Our stay turned out to be far more profita- 
ble than I could have supposed. When we 
left this unfruitful, though lovely, spot, which 
is perched up several thousand feet above the 
ordinary level of the earth, we took with us a 
charming Alpine Idyl. 

At times, however, a feeling of despondency 
would come over me. One evening I asked 
Lili— 

" How ever can you be so patient and so 
pleased in a poor, desert place like this, 
stopped just in the very middle of a pleasant 
journey to lovely, blessed regions ?" 

"Oh, Otto! I have no difficulty," she 
answered, quietly, u Certainly, it is barren 
and poor here, and many things are wanting ; 
but I know that behind yonder mountain lies 
a Paradise awaiting for me. But a few days 
and hours, and I shall be there. This is a 
true picture of life, is it not, Otto ? This 
world must so often appear to us a poor, 
desert place, full of wants. But for all that 
we can be comforted and happy. For we 
know that on the other side the mountain 
before us lies an Elysium that awaits us as our 
own Fatherland ; where a place has been pre- 
pared for us in a Father's house, with a 
brother's heart, and where they earnestly long 
after us. There is only a mountain between 



l 



XETTERS FROM HELL.' 295 

us and these blessed regions : it is the Moun- 
tain of the Crucifixion. The road passes over 
it ; then we shall be at home, then we shall be 
happy!" 

A few days later we rested ourselves in an 
enchanting villa, built on a promontory that 
jutted out far into the Lago di Maggiore. 
Lili was sitting by me in the pilastered hall, 
against whose basement the waves gently 
rippled, and whence we had a view of sur- 
passing loveliness across the lake to some 
islands which seemed as if they were floating 
on its surface. The clearly defined shores on 
the other side, above which the mountain-tops 
reared their heads aloft, pile upon pile, appeared 
as if they were gradually melting away ; while 
the loftiest and most distant tops and ridges 
appeared like glittering white clouds, that were 
on the point of floating away, or of dissolving 
themselves in the azure blue of Heaven. 

We had only recently been in mid-winter, 
now we were enjoying the most delightful 
summer weather. Lili was sitting with her 
lap full of some roses and myrtles she had 
been gathering. She was buried in deep 
thought, as she played with the flowers ; now 
gathering them up and letting them fall, or 
twining them in and out among one another, 
aiid again separating them. She literally 



296 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

bathed her pretty hands in the fresh flowers. 
My heart burned. The flowers she was play- 
ing with so thoughtlessly were the very ones 
suited for a bridal wreath. It was all I could 
do to prevent myself from seizing her little 
hands, and smothering them with kisses, and 
yet there was no danger. There was an 
angel always between her and me. 

" What are you thinking of, Lili ?" I asked, 
in an excited tone. 

" I was thinking of poor, dark Urserndal on 
the other side the mountain," she answered, com- 
posedly, and my heart began to beat violently ; 
" and as I think of it, everything around me 
here seems more lovely — yes, ravishingly 
beautiful. When I feel the magnificence of 
the present moment, I bless the hours I 
spent yonder side the mountain. Do you not 
think, dear Otto, that when once we are up 
there with God, a like happy feeling will 
come over us as we think of the dark, regret- 
ful days we have spent on earth ? I am sure of 
it. We shall bless them then, in so far as we 
were patient, and have preserved our hope* 
For bliss will then only be fully revealed to 
us when we recall them to mind." 

What hallowed, but painful feelings quivered 
through me at these words of Lili's ! It was 
not remorse alone, but a sincere repentance. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 297 

Should I ever come to look back with joy from 
a higher place on the life I had led on earth ? 
Oh what a life ! It must, it must be different. 
Need I explain my feelings at these remi- 
niscences, when I look back on my earthly 
life? But I never came over the mountain 
Lili spoke of, the Mountain of the Crucifixion. 
The mountain rather came on me, and beneath 
its weight I lie crushed, destroyed in Hell. - 

A tour in Italy, especially to a chivalrous 
gentleman like myself, is a sore trial of 
patience. Custom-house officers, porters, 
hotel keepers, beggars, all the pack that 
swarm along the highroads and fall upon the 
traveller like swarjns of gad-flies ; the cheat- 
ing ; and the swindling that pervades every- 
thing; all this was naturally more than I, 
with the best possible will, could endure. I 
was very much inclined to thrash my way 
through Italy, and I felt that I was the man 
to do so. But that is not a very delightful 
way of travelling through a beautiful coun- 
try, to say nothing of breaking a lance for the 
fair lady of one's heart. 

But Lili did not give me any liberty to do 
so. After having on one occasion terrified her 
by a violent scene which I bitterly repented 
afterwards, I submitted myself to her entirely, 



298 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

and allowed her to control me. I became as 
tractable as the Hon under the fairy's white 
hand in the fable. Thenceforth it was only 
necessary for her to lay a hand on my arm, to 
give me one look, or just speak to me by my 
name, to quell the most rebellious spirit in my 
nature. 

On the other hand, how admirably she under- 
stood to treat these wretched people. Where 
I only gained curses wherever I came, she 
reaped blessings. 

Her road through the world was, on the 
whole, wonderfully smooth for her. But she 
smoothed mine also. I felt that each day I 
lived with her I was becoming a better man. 
Yet, perhaps, this too was only an illusion; 
for an altered person I never became really ! 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 299 



CHAPTER XVI. 

" Their worm dieth not, and their fire is not 
quenched." 

Do you see, I remember even yet something 
of the religious teaching of my childhood ? 
Terrible words ! But it is in Hell only that 
one realizes their full meaning. 

The worm — that is, of course, remorse, 
which ever finds nourishment in evil recollec- 
tions ; the fire, are the fleshly lusts, for which 
no longer any fuel can be found. 

I have frequently alluded to the gnawing 
worm in these pages, but have spoken but 
little of the unquenchable fire. Do you ask, 
why? Then you must rest contented with 
the following explanation. 

Of the lusts of the flesh it is not well to 
speak in Hell; they are too repulsive, too 
unnatural. The least that can be said is that 
one inwardly loathes oneself. One feels anni- 
hilated in these lusts and passions, which are 
so utterly powerless, so utterly bare ; stripped, 
as it were, not to the skin, not even to the 



300 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

bones, but to the very heart's core. You will, 
doubtless, understand me when I simply tell 
you, — fleshly lusts without flesh must naturally 
be a torture of Hell. 

Yes, it is a fire ; an unquenchable fire. Un- 
quenchable just because there is no matter to 
feed it. If it depended at all upon matter it 
would not be unquenchable ; for no matter is 
eternal. 

What more can I say without approaching 
the subject too closely ? Here in Hell we are 
without a body ; but it is exactly as if we had 
one. That is the terrible part of it. This 
body that does not exist, demands an inces- 
sant attention on our parts, a constant stimulus 
of some kind or another. It will wallow in 
its wonted enjoyments and debaucheries. It 
is as craving as ever ; it abates not one tittle 
of its claims ; and the claim is made upon the 
poor lost soul, which it can never satisfy. But 
no refusal is accepted. In the world, it was 
the body that burned in the flames of lust. 
Here, it is the body no longer, it is legally 
excused. It is the soul that burns ! 

Old folks say — Yes, it is self-evident that 
we have very old folks in Hell. A thousand, 
two thousand, three thousand years, is no ex- 
cessively great age, according to the reckoning 
of the world. There are people who have 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 301 

lived under Sardanapalus, Cyrus, Alexander ; 
there are those who have been cotemporaries 
of Socrates, Cicero, Horace, Seneca, &c, &c. 
Yes, possibly some of these persons are them- 
selves present. But I have made it a rule not 
to particularize any one. There are those who 
could speak of the fall of Nineveh, the taking of 
Troy, the destruction of Jerusalem, who have 
studied the stars with the Chaldaeans, watched 
their flocks with Abraham, assisted at the 
building of the Pyramids. Yes, there are 
those who are even of older date than the 
Deluge. So you see we can study history 
from its very fountain head. But, unfor- 
tunately, everything here is devoid of interest 
and of usefulness. So we do not make it our 
study. As far as regards myself there is only 
one thing that engrosses and occupies my 
thoughts. I feel an inward longing to meet 
with some one who has lived with God's Son, 
the Saviour. But it is altogether fruitless. 
Certainly, there are those who have much to 
tell, but they tell of everything except of Him. 
Either it is a false Messiah, a promoter of re- 
bellions, or a malefactor. In all these volumi- 
nous tales there is not a particle of any higher 
truth, and it is that after which' my soul longs. 
Is it not desperate ? 

But I have wandered off from what I was 
going to say. 



302 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Old folks say that it is a remarkable fact, 
that the atmosphere, especially of late, has 
become much denser in Hell. We have no 
" asphyxi-ometer/' but I certainly am not 
overstating the mark, when I say that in the 
course of about a century nauseousness has 
increased fifty per cent. It will be a sad look- 
out if it continue to rise in this proportion ! 
This feeling of nausea, which never ceases, is 
an indescribable torture. It is exactly as if 
we must vomit. Naturally it is only a feel- 
ing, for otherwise we should vomit up our- 
selves, and that, of course, is nonsense. 

That twaddle was ever on the increase I 
had already observed when in the world. 
Clever persons, whom I spoke with about it, 
said it was owing to people being more and 
more enlightened. Truly, a very remarkable 
explanation ! But that twaddle increased to 
such a degree I really had no idea. 

Constantly on the increase — what a sorry 
prospect for the world ! Certainly the world 
cannot exist without it, and, therefore, up to a 
certain indefinite degree it finds pleasure in it. 
Many persons' lives are sheer twaddle alto- 
gether. But it must get too much at last. It 
forebodes another deluge ; the world seems as if 
it must sink under twaddle. It is only necessary 
to go back to the days of our grandfathers! 



LETTERS FROM HELL, 303 

How simple, comparatively, their manner of life 
was ! People then spoke out their opinions, 
and were understood. But from one decade 
to another, they have been getting more and 
more artificial and abstruse. Stays and sta- 
tistics have pushed themselves in everywhere 
to give twaddle a form and a little variety. 

Time is ever more and more fruitful in all 
manner of inventions, but more fruitful still 
in the most inconceivable circumlocution. 
Languages are ever being infinitely enriched 
with new words and modes of speech — the 
'flowers of eloquence — in the interests of 
twaddle. . Phrases and forms have become 
two of the ruling forces of life. The intellect 
shrinks up more and more, becomes stunted, 
cowed ; for it becomes of less and less import- 
ance ; it is twaddle, not genius, that has the 
upper hand. Truly, twaddle has offered to 
take genius into its service. But that would 
be too bad, contrary to all the laws of com- 
mon sense. Therefore genius says, 

" No, rather die first !" 
. Another observation, too, has recently been 
made, and not less striking. The number of 
women that come into the tortures of Hell is 
wonderfully increased, and like twaddle is 
ever increasing. This phenomenon has no 
connection with twaddle. In former days, 



304 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

and it is only necessary to go back half a cen- 
tury, the number of men in Hell was not so 
little above that of the women. Now the 
sexes are pretty nearly equally represented ; 
but, it is as well to remark that the women have 
already begun to exceed the men in numbers. 

There is a reason for everything, and the 
reason of this phenomenon cannot be enveloped 
in doubt to any one who has wandered along 
through the world with his eyes open. It lies 
in the modern way of bringing them up. 
Education is the watchword of the age. But 
in what does this education for the most part 
consist, which they so eagerly impart to 
women ? Is it the education of the heart or 
of the spirit that is implied? Are they 
made acquainted with nature and with history 
in order that eternity may dawn upon them 
like the sun, and refract a thousand beams 
through their hearts ? Are they taught what 
is great, noble, and beautiful in life, in order 
that they may become conscious of humanity, 
and of womanhood ? Are they taught before all 
things truthfulness and love ; and to feel that 
they are in God, their Creator, Saviour, and 
Lord ? ""s^ 

No! no such thought is ever entertained. 
By education is understood the making theip. 
spell or blunder through two or thre& 



i 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 305 

foreign languages, which they seldom learn to 
any profit. It is a part of their education that 
they may be able to strum upon some musical 
instrument or other, and execute some brilliant 
piece. Further it is a part of their education 
that they may be able to talk volubly about 
any topic, though they really know nothing at 
all about it, in order to show that they are more 
or less " emancipated,*' as the expression is. 
And further it is a part of their education that 
they dress and conduct themselves according 
to the fashion. Every fold in their dress is a 
matter of the last importance, while upon 
the folds in their hearts but little thought is 
bestowed. 

In short, outside show, and to be able to chat- 
ter, are considered to be all in all ; a show, by 
the way, which is not even able to befool any- 
body. They treat girls like dolls, and not like 
human beings : their bringing up, their educa- 
tion is from first to last but dollism ! Poor, poor 
women ! It is almost a worse treatment than 
you received even in the most barbarous times. 
Then people started from the supposition that 
you had no souls. And for a long while they 
might say so ; but you had a soul for all that. 
But now they have taken your soul away from 
you, and that is far, far worse. In truth it is 
little wonder that women thus rendered vain 

VOL. I. X 



306 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

from very childhood, should come crowding 
into Hell in ever-increasing numbers. 

In our forefathers' days it was very different. 
Women then were plainly brought up to fulfil 
their home duties ; the rest of their education 
was principally confined to teaching them their 
Catechism. Even that was something, and 
not so very little either. Women then had 
a conscience, and a destined part to fulfil. 
With pious and single hearts they felt them- 
selves to be in God, and found their greatest 
joy in performing the duties of their sphere 
of life, circumscribed though it might be. 
But now, what is duty ? 

One of the clearest interpretations modern 
days have given of it is, that it is something 
very wearisome. 

And what is to live? It is to be able 
to chatter, to trifle away time, to strum 
upon the piano, to dress, to get a hus- 
band, some sweet little children, which in 
time will grow up, and to have an establish- 
ment, to be f6ted, to be incomparable, if pos- 
sible, to the very last hour, and then — one 
thing is lacking yet, but to that how little 
heed is paid ! — and then to awaken and find 
themselves in the torments of Hell. 

In truth, dear people, your ladies' institutions 
are a kind of school for Satan. It is bad enough 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 307 

with men, but with women it is a hundred times 
worse. 

The other day I was sauntering about near 
the gates of Hell. Do not be misled by the 
appellation ! They are not the real gates of 
Hell, of course, which bid God and His mercy 
defiance. These are far deeper down, and 
belong to a far more terrible kingdom than 
the kingdom of death. I am alluding, of 
course, only to the guarded entrance to the 
place of torment. 

I call it the guarded entrance, for though 
the gates stand wide open, and no sentry is 
stationed there, yet no one has ever yet suc- 
ceeded to slip out through them of his own free 
will; on compulsion, perhaps; but, that is 
another matter, and then it is not for the 
best. I do not know, for certain, whether I 
actually made the attempt, but quite sure is 
it, that every time I approached a certain, but 
invisible, boundary, I felt within me an au- 
thoritative voice, saying : 

" Thus far, but no farther !" None ever go 
out thence, that is to say, not without ghostly 
privileges, which means the same thing as a 
"ticket of leave." Any one, however, can 
enter in. 

I do not recollect any longer how we used to 
reckon in the world. Was it every minute — 
no, surely, it was every second — that a soul 



308 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

was passing away ? Well, the greater number 
enter in at these gates of despair. If one 
would see Hell in all its naked misery, 
one must first appear here. On yonder side 
the gates is a thick, impenetrable, misty 
darkness, from which fresh shapes are ever 
emerging. Nay, they literally swarm, now 
in crowds, now singly ad infinitum. All of 
them are naked. There is none other distinc- 
tion between them but what is peculiar to 
sex and age. The beggar and the high-born 
cannot be distinguished from each other, they 
are alike bare, equally abject-looking. 

Aye! here misery is the common Adam- 
brand, and it would be useless to try and 
make its intensity conceivable. It is stamped 
alike on the countenances, the bearing of the 
poor wretches, and on the way in which they 
come. The road to Hell is easy and pleasant 
at first, but it becomes very arduous at last. 
Most of them creep along it, in a state of semi- 
consciousness, in a nervous dread, and know 
not how they are situated. 

It is, indeed, a sight which the world would 
term unique. You who cannot get enough of 
a sensational or piquant nature in the world, 
might get your fill here. I, for my part, could 
not endure it long. 

Everything here is matchless, so much the 
worse, and piquant in the very truest mean. 

< 

3 



\ 



LETTERS PROM HELL. 309 

ing of the word. Everything goes to the 
heart with a sting; but not two, out of all 
our numberless pains, are alike. On the 
present occasion, it seemed just as if every- 
thing within me was turned upside down. 
Perhaps you will say it was only the anguish 
and smart of self-love. Still, my friend, per- 
haps not entirely* There was something in 
that anguish, that smart, which was of a bet- 
ter nature. I could have wept over myself 
and others. 

However strange as it may seem, I had 
great difficulty in getting away from the place. 
It was only by cutting the matter very short 
with myself, that I was able to tear myself 
away, and then seek in solitude to digest the 
bitter thoughts which my experience had 
evoked within. 

But solitude was not vouchsafed me, for I 
soon noticed that I was not alone in this 
lonely spot. Deep sighs, and a low, wailing 
moaning, sounded close by me. 

Such occurrences are so common in Hell, that 
one is apt to pay no attention to them. But 
here I was away from the throng, and it was a 
single, whining voice I heard. I went a few 
steps in the direction of the sound, and present- 
ly found a wretched, crouching form, the very 
image of despair and of abject misery. He 
was an old man, but so abject did he seem, that 



310 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

there were no signs of reverence about him. 
His nakedness showed me that he had only 
recently made his entry into Hell ; while the 
crown that he wore upon his head, cocked as 
it were on one side, convinced me that I had 
a king before me. Had I been in the humour, 
I must have laughed at the sight of his crown, 
which was dangling all on one side, and 
seemed in such comical apposition to its 
original destination, for it was now merely a 
symbol of the derangement which had seized 
the poor wretch. 

As soon as he saw me, he crawled towards 
me, embraced my knees, and clung to me, as 
he exclaimed, in a tremulous voice : 

"Are you a human being? Are you a 
good, compassionate, human being ? Oh, then, 
pity me ! Do not leave me ! . > . Where am 
I ? . . . Oh ! I am perishing from fright and 
from torment !" 

So abject was his condition, that I really 
felt compassion for him. I could not, there- 
fore, find in my heart to tell him where he 
was, but expressed the word Hell in as round* 
about a way as I could. 

For a few moments he remained in deep 
thought, and then broke out again in a pite- 
ous wail : 

" Oh, miserable being that I am ! Trample 
me under foot ; spit on my beard if you please. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 311 

I deserve it ! . . . Listen to me. I will con- 
fess all my folly and pitifulness to you. . . . 

"You perceive, then, that I am a king? 
I came to the throne at an advanced age, and 
succeeded to a powerful and flourishing king- 
dom. But that was not enough! A worm 
gnawed within me. I could not rest content 
with simply insuring the happiness of my 
subjects, I longed to attain a warlike reputa- 
tion, like the most renowned of my forefathers. 
In a moment of vanity, I had assumed the 
title of Emperor. This high-sounding word 
involved great demands. I must put my foot 
on the neck of some petty king or other. 

" Already I was an old man ; there was no 
time to lose. Till then my conscience was 
unburdened. I might have closed my eyes in 
peace and with a sure confidence. But I was 
fool enough to look away from the thousand 
blessings I enjoyed. A war, then, I must wage. 
But I did not dare to wage one with my great 
and powerful neighbours. 

Far down among the mountains dwelt a 
small, impoverished people. They were a 
pastoral race. Their king scarce reached up 
to my knee. Him I selected for my enemy. 
I was firmly resolved not to grant him peace 
on any condition. I heaped wrong upon 
wrong, treachery upon treachery, and vio- 
lence upon violence ; thus at last I got him 



312 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

to fight a battle in desperation. The blood 
of thousands was shed ; but of course I won 
an easy victory. Listen further, and hear 
to what a pitch I carried my vanity. From 
first to last it was a monstrous lie, an im- 
pudent fabrication ; and, at any rate, in such 
a contest there could be no honour to gain. 
But for all that I deceived myself with the 
idea that I was only acting in accordance 
with my rights, and was fulfilling my duty 
towards my fatherland; that it was a mag- 
nanimous, noble exploit I had achieved, an 
heroic deed from which I could not but reap a 
lasting reputation. 

" But my laurels cost me dear, though I 
had thought to win them cheaply.. I was 
able to delude myself to a certain extent, but 
I could not befool the world. The whole 
world despised me in their hearts, though they 
brayed out their praises of me. So that in 
reality I had but little enjoyment from my 
acquired notoriety. 

" But worse was yet in store ! 

"Even still all might have been well. I 
knew God to be a merciful Lord. Had I only 
awakened to a penitent acknowledgment of 
my folly and crime, I might have found 
pardon even for this sin. But I hardened 
myself against the truth, and to the end 
of my life continued to hold fast by the de- 



t 

s 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 313 

lusion that I was a hero in the cause of honour 
and of right, whose name would be handed 
down to remotest generations with glory. 

" In the midst of this delusion I departed 
from life; not for the kingdom of Heaven, 
where a place was already prepared for the 
pious old man — alas, me! No, not to the 
kingdom of Heaven ! To the very last Satan 
tempted me, and I went to Hell ! 

" Yes, only tell me at once, dear stranger ! 
We are in the torments of Hell ? Oh, how 
I detest and despise myself! Fool, wretch 
that I was ! Oh, woe, woe is me ! " 

And he continued to commiserate himself. 
I could not do otherwise than allow that he 
was right. He really had conducted himself 
not only as a great fool, but, to speak plainly, 
as a great villain. But here we are villains 
altogether, in an endless variety. I did not 
leave him, therefore, till I had helped him to 
set matters a little straight. 

Naturally you inquire, "What king it was? 
What was his name, his country ?" 

Yes, indeed, inquisitiveness plays a great 
part in the world. But when td this I only 
reply, " he was a king of Abyssinia," you are 
perhaps as wise as you were before. For you 
are, doubtless, not up in the succession of the 
Abyssinian monarchs, and perhaps have 



314 LETTERS PROM HELL. 

scarcely ever heard the name of the last king 
of that country. Perhaps you do not even 
know that the king of Abyssinia is a Christian. 

But with this information you must rest 
content. I met this king of Abyssinia quite 
recently. He was dressed then like other 
decent people in Hell. The crown rested on 
his head, and he had already begun to form a 
little court around him. He was evidently in 
a good way to make himself at home ; but I 
cannot say that his condition was improved. 
For a crowd of persons, consisting of his own 
subjects and strangers, whom death had over- 
taken in the midst of their sins through his 
crimes, followed him wherever he went with 
wild and bitter curses. He was like a hanted 
wild beast, and could not escape out of the 
way; for he trembled with fear, and his crown 
weighed him down to the ground. 

So speedily and so entirely are the con- 
ditions of existence altered, when a person 
does not care to see where he is walking, or 
what he is doing. 

He sinks into the grave, and the grave is a 
bottomless pit to all whom God's mercy does 
not hold up; its bottom is only first to be 
found in Hell. 

This king had been taken in the very midst 
of the intoxication of victory ; now his intoxi- 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 315 

cation is passed, and is succeeded by that utter 
prostration of mind and body — the usual 
accompaniments of intemperance — which pre- 
vails in an extreme degree in Hell. 

He, too, had aspired to the title of the 
.Great. Oh, how piteously small he is now ; 
how small he tries to make himself in order 
to avoid his persecutors ! At chance times he 
may succeed in doing so ; but he will never 
be able to escape from himself. And, oh ! the 
contempt he feels for himself is alone a 
greater torture than they underwent whom 
he so thoughtlessly sent headlong to death. 

How rich in enjoyment is that earthly life 
when properly viewed. From Hell we can 
see it to be so with terrible clearness. And, I 
must confess, my life has been one of those 
that have been most richly endowed. How 
many happy, I am almost tempted to say 
blessed, moments, have I not experienced. 

Not unfrequently a bell sounds in my ears. 
It rings and rings ; its vibrating clang pierces 
my heart. It is the vesper bell, which I 
listened to so often in the world with feelings 
of delight. 

At the first sound, straightway a rustic 
landscape unfolds itself to my gaze, with all 
the enchantment which memory alone can 
impart. Either it is at home among the rich 



316 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

corn-fields, by wood or by lake ; or amid the 
lofty mountains, whose glittering summits are 
bathed in the evening glow. The sun has 
just set, but it has left a glow behind it, which 
is ever shifting overhead in a blaze of purple 
or of gold. Gradually all has become hushed. 
Nature sinks deeper and deeper into a hal- 
lowed repose. And that it is a hallowed 
repose, the vesper bell from the village church 
proclaims. 

The day's work is over ; everything is 
making ready to rest. Those who are united 
in love will soon be assembled together. In 
the cottage, the mother is gathering her chil- 
dren around her, awaiting the arrival of her 
husband ; and then, when he does come, the 
door is closed, and all the moil, vexations, and 
troubles of life are left outside. Perhaps a 
little grief lurks within, but it is forfeited to 
love. It serves but to nourish affection, and 
affection must subsist. 

Oh that I was but the poor labourer return- 
ing homewards from the fields with the 
wearied team; or the ragged urchin that 
saunters along behind the cattle. 

But the vesper bell says, " It is too late." — 
Yes, yes, it is too late ! 

What are my longings but the noose in 
which the despairing one hangs himself? 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 317 



CHAPTER XVII. 

I revert once more to my childhood. 

It was the evening before my aunt's birthday. 
My present had long been in readiness; and, 
with a restless feeling, I brooded over it, di- 
vided, childlike, between two opposite desires. 
Of course the nature of my present was to be 
kept a profound secret from her ; but, on the 
other hand, I was very anxious that she should 
have some suspicion of the surprise that was 
in store for her. A prey to these irreconcile- 
able emotions, I stole down to her room. 

She was not there. It was very vexatious ; 
I must wait for her. To pass away the time 
I let my eyes wander round the room. Every- 
thing was in its customary place, and there 
was literally nothing to attract my attention. 
I could not help indulging in a hearty yawn. 
But what was that ? A lovely butterfly on 
the window pane ! In a moment I was all 
life. Forgetting the good advice I had re- 
ceived about always letting small animals be 
at peace, I commenced an exciting chase. 



318 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Before long I had the butterfly between my 
fingers. It fluttered wildly with its wings, 
but that was of no avail. I held it fast, and 
examined it in the most scrutinizing way. 
Presently I heard footsteps ; it was my aunt ! 
So, in great confusion, I closed my hand upon 
it, and turned very hot and red in the face. 

My aunt entered the room with her accus- 
tomed sprightliness, and at once gave up her- 
self to me. But I was ill at ease, and stood 
like a blockhead before her, without being 
able to get a word out. So at last she had re- 
course, as usual, when she wanted to enliven 
me, to a story. I was so fond of stories, and 
Aunt Betty told them so capitally. Perhaps a 
severer criticism than mine might have pro- 
nounced them to be of little import. She 
used to invent most of them as she went on. 
And in this her great peculiarity consisted ; 
she was inexhaustible. However trifling or 
simple her tale might be, it was never without 
a suitable ending, and a moral that seldom 
failed to make an impression on me. 

The moral of this evening's story was — 
God sees all things. 

It had a great effect on me ; involuntarily 
I hid my closed hand behind my back. My 
heart began to beat high. I felt uncomfortable. 

" Do you see, my dear boy," she continued, 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 319 

" God sits upon his lofty throne, with an angel 
on either side, and they each of them have a 
tablet in their hands. God sees everything, 
and will forget nothing. The angel on His 
right marks down all the good that man is 
able to do here on earth, and he smiles ; oh, 
so very sweetly ! But the angel on the left 
marks down all the evil, and the tears run 
down his cheeks, so that the writing on the 
tablet is ever being rubbed out, and has inces- 
santly to be renewed. So when the last day 
comes, and men shall render an account of 
their doings in the presence of God, then will 
God call out in a voice of thunder, 'Bring 
forth the tablets.' And then it will depend on 
how the account stands. Have we done more 
evil than good, without having repented and 
obtained forgiveness for our sins, then may 
God have mercy upon us ! — We shall be for 
ever miserable !" 

This ending to the story made a terrible im- 
pression upon me. I clenched my hand so 
firmly, so firmly together ! It was just as if 
there were hot ashes within it ; but it was my 
naughty conscience that burned. The butter- 
fly must long have been dead, but I fancied I 
could still feel it fluttering, and that it would 
force my hands open. God sees all things, and 
one day we should have to give an account of 



320 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

everything. I could endure it no longer. I 
burst out into a violent flood of tears ; and, 
without being able to utter a single word, held 
out my hand with the dead butterfly in it. 

Aunt understood it all in a moment. She 
drew me towards her, and addressed me first 
with some gently reproachful words. There- 
upon she pointed out to me that G-od would 
forgive me my sin, according as I repented 
and was sorry for it. But it was long before 
she could stop my sobs, I was so frightened, 
and so very grieved with myself. Never have 
I known anything so comforting as the tender- 
ness displayed in my aunt's character. Then 
she made me fold my hands, that I might pray 
God to forgive me. I was deeply moved; 
truer worship was never offered. 

But my aunt had not finished yet. It was 
a new story, and it must have a suitable end- 
ing, and a moral. She pressed me to her 
bosom, and gently urged me that, 

" I should act thus my whole life through. 
As soon as ever I felt within myself that I had 
done anything wrong, I should at once go 
with a penitent heart and beseech God to 
forgive me, and promise Him never to do so 
more. Then the dear God would let mercy 
go before judgment, and I should have no 
need to dread the black tablet/' 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 321 

At last, in silent sorrow, we buried the dead 
butterfly in a flower-pot. We covered up its 
grave with rose leaves, as well as its tiny 
body, to prevent the dark black mould from 
touching it. 

With a lightened heart I left my aunt. 
But I passed a very uneasy night, and was 
haunted by the wildest dreams. Again and 
again the terrible words rang in my ears. 
" Bring forth the tablets P When I awoke it 
was quite dark. Hitherto I had never known 
what it was to be afraid of the dark ; but I 
knew it now. 

Early next morning I went to my aunt's 
room with my present. Contrary to custoi% 
the door was closed ; but it was immediately 
opened to me when I told her who it was. I 
was disagreeably surprised, when standing in 
the doorway, to see that my dear Aunt Betty 
was weeping in silence. Spread out before 
her was a row of all manner of small articles 
of the most varied and wonderful description. 
She beckoned me to approach, and embraced 
and kissed me in silence. I was so startled 
and grieved, that I quite forgot the precious 
present I held in my hand. The thought 
occurred to me, whether she, too, had crushed 
a butterfly to death. But it was soon diverted 
into another channel. 

vol. i. T 



322 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

" Aunt !" I exclaimed, " did you not say 
yesterday evening that God sees everything ? 
Does he then not see that you are crying ?" 

Aunt Betty looked up with a puzzled air. 
Suddenly it seemed as if a sunbeam was 
playing over her gentle features. 

"Yes! surely He does! my sweet child," 
she answered, as she passionately but tenderly 
pressed me to her bosom ; " and I am a great 
stupid ever to forget it, and to be grieved. 
He not only sees, but counts my tears !" 

And she quickly dried her eyes, and looked 
up with a smiling face. " Can you see, my 
boy, how God has dried them all up in a 
fjice ? He only has to breathe upon the eye, 
and they are gone !" 

" But why were you crying, dear aunt ?" 

" You would not understand, my child ! 
To-day I am an old maid of forty years. But 
it is so silly to cry. Let me only be an old 
miss of sixty, eighty, or a hundred years, I 
shall not trouble over it a bit, if it be God's 
will. But come now, and sit by me. I have 
a little story to tell you." 

I seated myself close by her side, and she 
threw her arm around me, and began as 
follows : 

" It is long since, dear Otto, but there was 
once a young and pretty girl, who was just as 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 323 

silly as she was pretty, for she thought the 
world was so delightfully beautiful, and that all 
its joys and happiness were in store for her. 
There was nothing really wicked in this, my 
boy ; but it was a dangerous, false delusion. 
But she thought the world was so lovely. 
That she was very pretty is quite certain ; but 
when any one told her so, she would bow her 
head, and cast her eyes down, as if she would 
sink into the earth. 

"And there was one who was constantly 
telling her so. Oh, how handsome he was! 
How strong and brave ! It was war time. 
He was the captain of a privateer, a regular 
desperado, they said* 

u And he became dearer and dearer to her. 
Do you know what a ball is, my dear ; I mean 
a regular, brilliant ball ? It is a wonderful 
thing, half angelic, half devilish. One is 
carried away as in a whirlwind, and held up 
suspended between Heaven and Hell. Enough, 
that when it was over, he besought her ear- 
nestly to give him one of her gloves. I think, 
indeed, at this moment she would not have 
denied him anything. He got it; and here 
you see the fellow to it. It is the plain truth 
I am telling you." 

And she showed me number one of her won- 
derful collection. It was an old kid glove. 

" But the young girl's family said that he 



324 LETTERS FROM HELL, 

was an adventurer and a rake, whom no 
honourable girl could have anything to do 
with. It was sad news for her ! But he had, 
as it were, taken her soul from her ; she loved 
him so dearly ! And so at last they were be- 
trothed. Here you have the ring. He wore 
it once on his right hand. 

" She was happy now. There was only 
one voice in the world that had entrance to 
her heart, and that was his. Likely enough 
he had many and great faults ; but that was 
of little import to her ; she loved him just as 
he was. Had he been an outcast among men, 
I think she would all the same have held fast 
to him. When one has once given away 
one's heart — but of course you understand 
nothing about that. 

"Well, he went out and returned home 
again. It was a noble ship he commanded. 
It was called the Viking. Here it is ! 

"He brought home one prize after another, 
and they yielded large sums of money. But 
it was said that he made away with it all, and 
that he was a dissipated man, who played 
ducks and drakes with everything." 

And aunt showed me an exquisite little pic- 
ture, representing a schooner at sea in fall 
sail. 

" Often he was away for a very long time. 
But they wrote to one another as wfcll as they 



< 

\ 
{ 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 325 

could. Oh, what letters ! She put her whole 
soul in them. And he — 

" Here you see the letters he wrote to the 
young girl." 

And she showed me a little packet of faded 
letters, carefully bound round with a faded 
ribbon. 

" At length she heard no more from him. 
Oh, what she suffered during this sorrowful 
time ! A letter did come at last. He lay ill, 
very ill, in a seaport town of some foreign 
land. Winter was coming on ; but she did 
not shrink back for that. Taking a girl with 
her, she journeyed a long distance over land, 
and found him in a piteous state. He had 
fought a duel, and had been wounded. You 
do not know what that means, and it is not 
necessary that you should; but it really 
occurred. 

" This is the bullet ! 

" She nursed him, and he recovered. She 
set him at liberty, and paid his debts. It was 
nothing, nothing at all ! Full of penitence, he 
returned home with her an altered man. The 
explanation he gave satisfied even her family. 
He would not go privateering any more. It 
was arranged that he should command a large 
merchant vessel belonging to her brother, and 
that she should accompany him as his wife. 

" Only once more were they to be separated, 



326 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

never to be parted again. He had to visit his 
family, and arrange his affairs. 

" Time passed on ; the wedding-day was ap- 
proaching. Happy day that was to crown all 
her hopes, and repay her for all her pains. 
The bridal dress was laid out in readiness. 
Here you see the bridal wreath ! Do you 
know the myrtle? It only bears touching 
once a-year, and each year two leaves drop off. 
But it will last as long as there are eyes to 
look at it. 

" Then a letter came. At the very last sta- 
tion he had turned back, never to return 
again. Here is the sorrowful letter, blotched 
all over with her tears ! Oh, what it cost her 
to answer it ! 

" Was he, then, wicked ? No ; only fickle ! 
He had got entangled in a web of thoughtless 
engagements, from which he could not extri- 
cate himself. His uncle, whose heir he was, 
had a daughter. God bless her! He had 
plighted his faith on two sides. Men do such 
things, and not so unfrequently. But, of 
course, he could only keep it on one side. 
He fulfilled his duty towards her who perhaps 
had suffered the most through him, and who 
— but it is not worth dwelling upon. Enough 
to say that he became a steady and honest 
man, and has, I hope, obtained pardon for the 
sins of his youth. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 327 

" But she who had cheerfully given up 
everything for him could never settle to any- 
thing ; and with beauty, happiness, future pro- 
spects, it was all over. By degrees she became 
old and ugly, and lived only for the little good 
she was able to show to others. For though 
it be an evil world, all people are not evil, 
but many of them are unfortunate, and re- 
quire a little aidj poor things ! In a word, 
my love, God was her comfort P 

Thus aunt ended her story, and thereupon 
began to pack up her treasures very carefully. 

When she had done she said, " So, now it 
is all over. It is time to be thinking about 
dinner." 

Of course I did not understand a word of it, 
neither was it necessary that I should. The 
old maid had longed to relieve her heart to a 
human being ; but she would not let out her 
secret. 

Now I remember every single word, and 
understand it perfectly ; both the story itself, 
and what she felt at that hour, and how heavy 
her heart must have felt on her fortieth birth- 
day since she lightened it to me, a little igno- 
rant child. 

At the dinner-table Aunt Betty was exceed- 
ingly merry. She made speeches at which 
everybody laughed; and she was brimming 
over with witty remarks for the rest of the day. 



328 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

But those words — " God sees everything" 
—often returned to my recollection, even at a 
riper age. It was, however, more the dread 
than the comfort contained in them that 
made the impression upon me. So different 
was I to my good, pious aunt. But the 
time soon came when it was in my power 
to throw these terribly ominous words to 
the winds. And soon the time came when 
I crushed one butterfly after the other to 
death without feeling any great prickings of 
conscience. 

It must certainly have been the case that 
some time or other you gave up a whole or half 
a day to looking through, sorting, or destroy- 
ing old letters and papers. Then you shut to 
the door in order not to be disturbed; you 
made yourself comfortable, lighted your cigar, 
and set to work. 

It was not any hard work ; but still you 
must allow that you became rather red in the 
face, and that at the expiration of a few hours 
you felt yourself wonderfully exhausted and 
spent. What was it that thus excited you, 
made you so uneasy in spirit, and taxed your 
strength ? It was not the labour, for that was 
nothing. No ; it was the recollections, which 
came streaming in upon you one after the . 
other. And yet, perhaps, the greater number 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 329 

of them were pleasant ones ; aye, more than 
pleasant, rich in joy, precious. 

After this you will be able, to form a faint 
idea of what in one respect we have to suffer 
here. Recollections come crowding in, and 
most of them sorrowful, because they are evil. 
They come without any cause, spontaneously, 
and without any limitation. It is not a few 
reminiscences here and there, that by chance 
get furbished up ; but all the recollections of a 
whole life, which perforce press themselves in. 
We may leave the good ones out of the reckon- 
ing, though these, too, can inflict sorrow, 
regret, and pain. But the evil ones ! Their 
name is Legion ! And each of them presses 
forward with its claim. There is no sin so 
little, or so mean, during the whole career of 
our lives, that does not step forward and raise 
its accusing voice. For justice is the very 
groundwork of existence ; though here it first 
becomes manifest. 

And you must not think only of evil or of 
heedless actions } every evil or thoughtless 
word we have spoken, yes, every thought, has 
the same fearful claim upon us. Like the 
Parthian horsemen they swarm round us in 
triple columns, each striking a blow in turn, 
or discharging a poisoned shaft, and again 
withdrawing to make room for others. Ah ! 
the comparison fails ; so much the worse ! 



330 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

Some of these evil recollections never cease 
after the first gash, but become incorporated, 
as it were, into the bleeding heart. 

Can you realize the nature and the extent 
of this suffering ? Do you realize to what a 
degree we must feel ourselves exhausted by 
the numbers, and by the strength of these re- 
collections? And there is no cessation, no 
alleviation ! For though the suffering be not 
always equally intense, yet there can be no 
mention made of alleviation in Hell. 

Oh, these recollections ! this remorse ! I 
am daily tempted to say that they are unen- 
durable; but still we endure them. And 
most terrible of all is it when they break out 
suddenly upon us from an ambush and pierce 
a dagger into the heart. What has been for- 
gotten for twenty, thirty, or even for a greater 
number of years, suddenly stands out as plain 
as life before one, as if it had risen up from 
the dead. Yes, it is exactly as if the grave 
opened itself. Every wrong thing that we 
have done in our lifetime, from the greatest 
to the least, comes forth. 

Oh, my friend ! impress this upon yourself 
and upon all you love, that " it is useless, use- 
less to forget !" 

But I must not quite discard the orderly 
and decorous social life we seek to live here. 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 331 

Even the most experienced may at times break 
out, and I should be constantly breaking out 
if I did not lay a strong check on my restless 
spirit. 

One of the great ruling tendencies in the 
world is to pass the time away, and for that 
ten thousand and the most incredible means 
have been invented. Whether ungodliness or 
foolishness is the most prominent in this, it is 
not easy to decide. 

There are few words that so exactly describe 
the world's perversion as this — Pastime. 

Time is synonymous with life ; one must 
live, and thus one beguiles the time; yes, 
that is just why one does it. It is time 
that through joy and sorrow gradually de- 
velops the fullness of existence both within 
and without ; and however full of ambition 
one may be, it must be beguiled. Yes, it must 
be beguiled, and that is called to live ; and after 
time comes death, which only waits for it to 
come to an end. Pastime thus becomes an 
endless and ridiculous attempt at suicide. One 
beguiles the time as if it wfcre some frightful 
monster, an enemy to life and happiness ; but 
the monster first appears when time is no more. 

All the treasures of Golconda cannot weigh 
against the contents of a single day, aye, nor 
of a single hour. Each hour, as it were, 
brims over with blessings. Of what value 



332 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

then must time be in its full and free extent ? 
Its measure is only to be found in Heaven, 
where the Love which created it sits enthroned. 

Here in Hell we have emerged from all 
such misty clouds, and also from that which 
the world calls pastime. The naked truth 
and reality surround us on all sides. In time 
all the fullness of life, and all the blessings 
love could devise, were offered to us with a 
Father's hand. But we behaved as you do ; 
we trod understanding under foot ; we passed 
away the time, and knew not what we did. 
Now it is past — quite past — and all hope has 
gone with it. But we, too, are past — quite 
past — doomed to Hell, out of the pale of ex- 
istence, never more to return. 

In the world the theatre was one of our 
principal sources of amusement wherewith to 
beguile the time. We, too, have our theatre 
here, though there is no longer any time to 
beguile. It is only an old custom that makes 
it necessary to us. Here, too, women must 
have something to rave about, and men some- 
thing to go mad with admiration for ; women 
and men together, something to talk and con- 
verse about. Weather with us is no object ; 
the more necessary, therefore, is a theatre. 

Our theatre is after a peculiar style, and 
on a grand scale, to which the world, even 
that world in the world — I mean Paris — cannot 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 333 

produce an equal. The repertoire, so far as it 
depends upon poetical composition, is certainly 
rather poor. It is but seldom that a piece in 
the world is vulgar enough to come down 
here ; frivolity, insipidity, and emptiness are 
the prevailing fashion, and that naturally can- 
not yield a large return. But we have a way 
of our own of providing the stage with pieces, 
and it will, doubtless, be acknowledged that 
theatrical effect in the world is like water when 
compared with what it is here. 

With the exception of a few pieces handed 
down to us from the world our repertoire con- 
sists of actual occurrences. And not only that, 
but our actors, too, are the very persons con- 
nected with those occurrences. They merely 
repeat on the stage what they have enacted 
in the world. There is no illusion here, there- 
fore; ideally, a complete reality is offered. 
What is represented has actually taken place, 
and been enacted by these very actors. , 

We have theatre directors in abundance. 
In the world it was a very troublesome post, 
an endless source of annoyance. How often 
has it not been termed a regular Hell ? But 
it is here that directors first begin to realize the 
Hell. They have to vie with each other, and 
strain every nerve in order to bring something 
on the stage that is interesting, exciting, dread- 
ful, or touching. Yes, strange enough, we, 



"334 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

too, must be moved, but, unfortunately, can- 
not be. First, a hunt must be made after 
something that has occurred (alias a drama). 
Next, the persons connected with this drama 
must be ferreted out, and they are often dis- 
persed over all parts of Hell. But when found 
they must obey orders at once, and act their 
proper parts. Yet it is difficult to find them 
out and collect them together. 

Perhaps an example will best illustrate my 
meaning. 

A play was lately performed, entitled " The 
Jewels." It is a tale of seduction, accom- 
panied by murder and robbery, and is com- 
posed with diabolical ingenuity. A pretty, 
good, but simple-hearted woman, was seduced ; 
but her seduction was merely the means to 
the object, not the object itself. That was 
neither more nor less than a robbery of jewels, 
in the perpetration of which two cruel murders 
were requisite. It is really a powerful piece ; 
though, in a sense, quite different to that in 
which the word is used in the world ; because 
here there is no invention in it ; in all its 
parts, down to the very minutest details, it is 
real fact. I can even still remember reading 
the horrible case in the papers ; the sensation 
it created was enormous. They are the very 
same persons who perform the parts here; 
villains, of course, all of them. The virtuous 



LETTERS FROM HELL. 335 

characters naturally, in a great measure, are 
not under the director's command. 

The immense advantage of this is readily 
perceptible. We have real murderers, real 
cheats, rascals and villains, real seducers, &c, 
&c., and everything has really been enacted 
as represented on the stage. 

The real characters perform their parts 
under compulsion, and under inconceivable 
suffering, but with a literal truthfulness. To 
fill up the parts of the virtuous characters, in 
default of better, they use accomplished hypo- 
crites, of which there is never any lack, and 
which have very great pleasure in availing 
themselves of the opportunity of displaying 
their talents. These parts, too, are represented 
in the most perfect manner. 

It is a natural consequence, that in all these 
pieces no worldly code of morals is followed ; 
we are far beyond that sort of thing. The 
good is far from always triumphing ; and, on 
the other hand, it is not always the evil. It 
takes what course it can, or rather the very 
course it once followed. 

Meanwhile, again I must say strange enough, 
those pieces in which right and justice triumph 
produce an infinitely greater effect than those 
where evil predominates. These are made a 
subject of scorn and contempt. 

The scenery — of course there can be no talk 



336 LETTERS FROM HELL. 

about decorations — is not to be surpassed. I 
am, of course, only speaking of an illusion, but 
the illusion is perfect. We are able to repro- 
duce apy spot or locality, only of course as a 
shadow ; but still the resemblance is perfect- 
It appears to the very life; true and real. 
Sometimes the pictures produce an indescrib- 
able effect. Many a soul is well nigh driven 
mad at the sight of the well-known spot, and 
conducts himself like one beside himself with 
pain, longing, and regret. 

On the whole, it is evident that these repre- 
sentations produce a very striking impression. 
But there is nothing satisfying in them ; on 
the contrary, the pain is intense, equally so to 
actors as to spectators. But in this respect 
as in all others, there is an implacable law. It 
is no longer the law of Liberty, as in the world ; 
it is the law of Necessity. 

We must! It is one word too much, and 
there all discussion ends. 



END OF VOL. I. 



^*~/^\ \) 



\ 



ffl! 



THE NEW YORK 

BBFBRBNCB DBPARTM 
ThL book U o«der oo circum.fUl««» 



ft- 



. ' - ¥■:■ 




1 



